This directory tree holds version 21.4 of XEmacs, the extensible,
customizable, self-documenting real-time display editor.  This version
of XEmacs also runs on various Microsoft Windows platforms including
MS Windows '95 and MS Windows NT and Cygwin.

See the file `etc/NEWS' for information on new features and other
user-visible changes since the last version of XEmacs.

The file `INSTALL' in this directory says how to bring up XEmacs on
Unix and Cygwin, once you have loaded the entire subtree of this
directory.

The file `PROBLEMS' contains information on many common problems that
occur in building, installing and running XEmacs.

See the file `nt/README' for instructions on building XEmacs for
Microsoft Windows.

The file 'README.packages' will guide you in the installation of
(essential) add on packages.

Reports of bugs in XEmacs should be posted to the newsgroup
comp.emacs.xemacs or sent to the mailing list xemacs@xemacs.org.  See
the "Bugs" section of the XEmacs manual for more information on how to
report bugs.  (The file `BUGS' in this directory explains how you can
find and read that section using the Info files that come with
XEmacs.)  See `etc/MAILINGLISTS' for more information on mailing lists
relating to XEmacs and other GNU products.

The file `configure' is a shell script to acclimate XEmacs to the
oddities of your processor and operating system.  It will create a
file named `Makefile' (a script for the `make' program), which helps
automate the process of building and installing emacs.  See INSTALL
for more detailed information.

The file `configure.in' is the input used by the autoconf program to
construct the `configure' script.  Since XEmacs has configuration
requirements that autoconf can't meet, `configure.in' uses an unholy
marriage of custom-baked configuration code and autoconf macros; it
may be wise to avoid rebuilding `configure' from `configure.in' when
possible.

The file `Makefile.in' is a template used by `configure' to create
`Makefile'.

There are several subdirectories:

`src' holds the C code for Emacs (the XEmacs Lisp interpreter and its
    primitives, the redisplay code, and some basic editing functions).
`lisp' holds the Emacs Lisp code for XEmacs (most everything else).
`lib-src' holds the source code for some utility programs for use by
    or with XEmacs, like movemail and etags.
`etc' holds miscellaneous architecture-independent data files
    XEmacs uses, like the tutorial text and the Zippy the Pinhead quote
    database.  The contents of the `lisp', `info' and `man'
    subdirectories are architecture-independent too.
`lwlib' holds the C code for the toolkit objects used by XEmacs.

`info' holds the Info documentation tree for XEmacs.
`man' holds the source code for the XEmacs info documentation tree.

`nt' holds configuration files for compiling XEmacs under Microsoft Windows
    NT.  The support for NT is very tentative right now.
