@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Windows and Menus, Edit, Entering, Top
@chapter SXEmacs Windows and Menus
@cindex selected window
@cindex windows
@findex delete-window
@findex delete-other-windows
@findex scroll-other-window

  The first section of this chapter will show you how you can manipulate
SXEmacs Windows and the other section will explain the Pull-down Menus of
an SXEmacs window.

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@menu
* SXEmacs Window::               Manipulating SXEmacs Windows
* Pull-down Menus::             Description of SXEmacs Pull-down Menus
@end menu

@node SXEmacs Window, Pull-down Menus, Windows and Menus, Windows and Menus
@section SXEmacs Windows
  When you use SXEmacs under X, you can open multiple windows and each
window can display one buffer or multiple parts of one buffer. Each window
will have its own @dfn{mode line} and @dfn{echo area}. At any one time
there is only one @dfn{selected window} and the buffer it displays is
the @dfn{selected buffer}. There are some commands for manipulating
windows:

@kindex C-x 0
@kindex C-x 1
@kindex C-x 2
@kindex C-x 3
@kindex C-x 4
@kindex M-C-v
@table @kbd
@item M-C-v
@findex scroll-other-window
This command will scroll the window which is not @dfn{selected}
(@code{scroll-other-window}).

@findex delete-window
@item C-x 0
This command will get rid of the selected window (@code{delete-window}).
That is a zero. If there is more than one Emacs frame, deleting the
sole remaining window on that frame deletes the frame as well. If the
current frame is the only frame, it is not deleted.

@findex delete-other-windows
@item C-x 1
This command will get rid of all the windows except the selected one.
(@code{delete-other-windows}). For example, if you use the @b{Describe
variable} option from the @b{Help} menu, the window will split
vertically and the bottom window will contain documentation for that
variable. After you are done looking at that variable's documentation
you might want to come back to your original single window. Just type
@kbd{C-x 1} after your cursor is in the top window (the window which you
want to keep) and hit @key{RET}.

@findex split-window-vertically
@item C-x 2
This command will split the selected window into two windows, one above
the other (@code{split-window-vertically}). Both the windows will start
out by displaying the same buffer. The window in which you have your
cursor will be your @dfn{selected window}.

@findex split-window-horizontally
@item C-x 3
This will split the selected window into two windows positioned side by
side (@code{split-window-horizontally}). A line of vertical bars will
separate the window.
@end table
@noindent

You can select a buffer in another window by using some other
commands. These commands all have a prefix key @kbd{C-x 4}
@table @kbd
@kindex C-x 4 b
@kindex C-x 4 f
@kindex C-x 4 d
@kindex C-x 4 m
@findex switch-to-buffer-other-window
@findex find-file-other-window
@findex dired-other-window
@findex mail-other-window
@item C-x 4 b @var{bufname} @key{RET}
This command will select a buffer @var{bufname} in another window.  This
runs @code{switch-to-buffer-other-window}. It will prompt you for a
buffername.

@item C-x 4 f @var{filename} @key{RET}
Visit file @var{filename} and select its buffer in another window.  This
runs @code{find-file-other-window}.  @xref{Visiting,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs User's
Manual}. It will prompt you for a filename.

@item C-x 4 d @var{directory} @key{RET}
Select a Dired buffer for directory @var{directory} in another window.
This runs @code{dired-other-window}.  @xref{Dired,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs User's
Manual}.

@item C-x 4 m
Start composing a mail message in another window.  This runs
@code{mail-other-window}, and its same-window version is @kbd{C-x m}.
@xref{Sending Mail,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs User's Manual}, for information on how
to @b{S}end @b{M}ail using SXEmacs. @xref{Reading Mail With
Rmail,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs User's Manual}, for information on reading mail using
@b{Rmail}.
@end table


  If you click the right button on the mouse on a mode line, you will
get a menu with following options:
@cindex windows
@cindex pull-down-menus
@cindex menus
@table @b
@item Delete Window
Choosing this menu will remove the window above this modeline from the frame.
@item Delete Other Windows
Delete all windows on the frame except for the one above this modeline.
@item Split Window
Split the window above the mode line in half, creating another window.
@item Split Window Horizontally
Split the window above the mode line in half horizontally, so that there
will be two windows side-by-side.
@item Balance Windows
Readjust the sizes of all windows on the frame until all windows have
roughly the same number of lines.
@end table


@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Pull-down Menus,  , SXEmacs Window, Windows and Menus
@section SXEmacs Pull-down Menus

When you run SXEmacs under X, each Emacs frame has a menu-bar at the top
which provides commands for editing, help and other
options. All these options are also available via key commands, the
menus just provide convenient short-cuts. The key commands are displayed
right besides some of the options. The following is a brief
description of the four default menus on the menu bar:

@menu
* File menu::                   Items on the File menu
* Edit menu::                   Items on the Edit menu
* Options Menu::                Items on the Options Menu
* Buffers Menu::                Items on the Buffers Menu
* Help menu::                   The Help Menu at the extreme right on
                                the frame
@end menu

@node File menu, Edit menu, Pull-down Menus, Pull-down Menus
@subsection The File Menu
@cindex File menu
@cindex Open in New Frame... menu item
@cindex Open ... menu item
@cindex Insert File... menu item
@cindex Save Buffer menu item
@cindex Save Buffer As ... menu item
@cindex Revert Buffer menu item
@cindex Kill Buffer menu item
@cindex Print Buffer menu item
@cindex New Frame menu item
@cindex Delete Frame menu item
@cindex Split Frame
@cindex Un-split (Keep This)
@cindex Un-split (Keep Others)
@cindex Exit Emacs menu item

The @b{File} menu bar contains the following items. To choose a
particular option, press the left mouse button and drag it to the item
you wish to select. Then release the button.

@table @b
@item Open...
This option will prompt you for a file name. You will get a message in
the echo area:

@example
Find File:
@end example
@noindent
After Find File, there might be a directory path also. After you type
the file name and press @key{RET} the file will be loaded into a new
buffer.

@item Open in New Frame...
It prompts you for a file name and loads that file in a new buffer in
a new frame. You can open many frames for the same Emacs session. You
can delete the frame by selecting @b{Delete Frame}.

@item Insert File...
Prompts you for a filename and inserts the contents of this filename in
your current buffer. Position your cursor at the place you wish to
insert the file and select this option. You will get the following
message in the echo area:

@example
Insert file:
@end example
@noindent
Insert the file name and press @key{RET}.

@item Save <Buffername>
It saves the changes you have made to the buffer. If you have made
changes which are not saved yet, the option will appear dark, otherwise
it will be light and unselectable. If you do not wish to save the
changes, select @b{Revert Buffer}.

@item Save As...
Prompts you for a filename and saves the current buffer in that file. It
loads the new file if the filename you specify is different from the one
you were working with.

@item Print Buffer <buffername>
Prints a hardcopy of the current or @dfn{selected} buffer.

@item New Frame
Opens a new frame with @b{*scratch*} as the default buffer. It doesn't
prompt you for a filename. To open a file you need to go to that frame
and select @b{Open...}

@item Split Frame
Splits the current window into two equal-sized windows with the same
buffer. To get back a single frame, select @b{Un-Split (Keep
This)}. @xref{SXEmacs Window}, for more information about windows.

@item Un-Split (Keep This)
If the frame contains multiple windows, it will remove all windows
except the selected one.

@item Un-Split (Keep Others)
If the frame contains multiple windows, it will remove the selected
window and keep the other one.

@item Revert Buffer <buffername>
If you do not wish to save the changes you made to the file since you
opened it, select this option. It will restore the last saved version of
the file to the current buffer.

@item Kill Buffer <buffername>
It will kill the current buffer. If will prompt you if there are unsaved
changes.

@item Exit Emacs
It will kill the Emacs @dfn{process} as opposed to simply killing the
@dfn{buffer}. Before it kills the process, it will prompt you as to
which unsaved buffers you wish to save by going through the list of the
buffers.

@end table

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@menu
* Edit menu::                   Items on the Edit Menu
* Options Menu::                Items on the Options Menu
* Buffers Menu::                Items on the Buffers Menu
* Help menu::                   The Help Menu at the extreme right on
                                the frame
@end menu

@node Edit menu, Options Menu, File menu, Pull-down Menus
@subsection The Edit Menu
@cindex Undo menu item
@cindex Cut menu item
@cindex Copy menu item
@cindex Paste menu item
@cindex Clear menu item
@cindex Start Macro Recording menu item
@cindex End Macro Recording menu item
@cindex Execute Last Macro menu item

Most of the commands in this menu work on a block of text or a selected
region. The text will be highlighted as you select it.
@table @b
@item Undo
Undoes the previous command.  If you type something by mistake you can
use this command. For example, if you select @b{Insert File...} from the
@b{File} menu and insert a wrong file by mistake, you can select this
item and it will remove the inserted file. It undoes a batch of text
which is worth an emacs command.

@item Cut
Removes the selected text block from the current buffer, makes it the X
clipboard selection, and places it in the kill ring
(@pxref{Moving Text}). Before executing this command, you have to select
a region using Emacs region selection commands or with the
mouse. @xref{Selecting Text}.

@item Copy
Makes a selected text block the X clipboard selection, and places it in
the kill ring.  You can select text using one of the Emacs region
selection commands or by selecting a text region with the
mouse. @xref{Selecting Text}, for more information.

@item Paste
Inserts the current value of the X clipboard selection in the current
buffer.  Note that this is not necessarily the same as the Emacs
@code{yank} command, because the Emacs kill ring and the X clipboard
selection are not the same thing.  You can paste in text you have placed
in the clipboard using @b{Copy} or @b{Cut}.  You can also use @b{Paste}
to insert text that was pasted into the clipboard from other
applications. @xref{X Clipboard Selection,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs User's Manual},
for information on using Clipboard Selection.

@item Clear
Removes the selected text block from the current buffer but does not
place it in the kill ring or the X clipboard selection. You will not be
able to get this text back.

@item Start Macro Recording
After selecting this, Emacs will remember every keystroke you type until
@b{End Macro Recording} is selected.

@item End Macro Recording
Selecting this tells emacs to stop remembering your keystrokes.

@item Execute Last Macro
Selecting this item will cause emacs to re-interpret all of the
keystrokes which were saved between selections of the @b{Start Macro
Recording} and @b{End Macro Recording} menu items.  You can now execute
the most recent keyboard macro. @xref{Keyboard Macros,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs
User's Manual}, for further information.
@end table

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Options Menu, Buffers Menu, Edit menu, Pull-down Menus
@subsection The Options Menu
@cindex Options menu
@cindex Read Only menu item
@cindex Case Sensitive Search menu item
@cindex Overstrike menu item
@cindex Auto Delete Selection menu item
@cindex Teach Extended Commands menu item
@cindex Syntax Highlighting menu item
@cindex Paren Highlighting menu item
@cindex Font menu item
@cindex Size menu item
@cindex Weight menu item
@cindex Buffers Menu Length... menu item
@cindex Buffers Sub-Menus menu item
@cindex Save Options

There are sub-menus for some of the menus which you will need to
select. If sub-menus exist for an item, they will be displayed
automatically when you drag the mouse on that item. The items in this
menu provide some fancy editing operations.

@table @b
@item Read Only
Selecting this item will cause the buffer to visit the file in a
read-only mode. Changes to the file will not be allowed.

@item Case Sensitive Search
Selecting this item will cause searches to be case-sensitive. If
its not selected then searches will ignore case. This option is
local to the buffer. For example, if this item is selected and you are
searching for @samp{Smile}, then an occurrence of @samp{smile} will not
be recognized because of the smaller case of @samp{s}.

@item Overstrike
After selecting this item, when you type letters they will replace
existing text on a one-to-one basis, rather than pushing it to the
right. At the end of a line, such characters extend the line. Before
a tab, such characters insert until the tab is filled in.

@item Auto Delete Selection
Selecting this item will cause automatic deletion of the selected
region. After you select a region and hit the @key{RET} key, the
selected text will be deleted. The typed text will replace the selection
if the selection is active (i.e. if its highlighted). If the option is
not selected then the typed text is just inserted at the cursor.

@item Teach Extended Commands
After you  select this item, any time you execute a command with
@kbd{M-x} which has a shorter keybinding, you will be shown the
alternate binding before the command executes. For example if you type
@kbd{M-x find-file-other-window} which performs the same function as the
@b{Open in Other Window...} in @b{File} menu you will see the following
message:

@example
M-x find-file-other-window (bound to keys: C-x 4 f, C-x 4 C-f)
@end example

@item Syntax Highlighting
You can customize your @code{init.el} file to include the font-lock mode
so that when you select this item, the comments will be displayed in one
face, strings in another, reserved words in another, and so
on. @xref{Customization,,,sxemacs,SXEmacs User's Manual}, for more
information on customizing @code{init.el} file.  After selecting this
item, you will find your code a lot easier to read. When @b{Fonts} is
selected, different parts of the program will appear in different
Fonts. When @b{Colors} is selected, then the program will be displayed
in different colors. Selecting @b{None} causes the program to appear in
just one Font and Color. Selecting @b{Less} resets the Fonts and Colors
to a fast, minimal set of decorations. Selecting @b{More} resets the
Fonts and Colors to a larger set of decorations. For example, if
@b{Less} is selected (which is the default setting) then you might have
all comments in green color. It does not matter what the comments
contain. Whereas, if @b{More} is selected then a function name in the
comments themselves might appear in a different Color or Font. Even
though the comments themselves might appear in green color, a function
name @dfn{within} the comments might appear in red color.

@item Paren Highlighting
After selecting @b{Blink} from this item, if you place the cursor
on a parenthesis, the matching parenthesis will blink. If you select
@b{Highlight} and place the cursor on a parenthesis, the whole
expression of the parenthesis under the cursor will be highlighted.
Selecting @b{None} will turn off the options (regarding @b{Paren
Highlighting}) which you had selected earlier.@refill

@item Font
You can select any Font for your program by choosing from one of the
available Fonts. The whole buffer will be converted to the Font you select.

@item Size
You can select any size for the text in your buffer (ranging from @b{2} to @b{24}) by selecting the appropriate option.@refill

@item Weight
You can choose either @b{Bold} or @b{Medium} for the weight of the text
of your buffer.

@item Buffers Menu Length...
Prompts you for the number of buffers to display. Then it will display
that number of most recently selected buffers.

@item Buffers Sub-Menus
After selection of this item the Buffers menu will contain several
commands, as submenus of each buffer line. If this item is unselected,
then there are no submenus for each buffer line, the only command
available will be selecting that buffer.

@item Save Options
Selecting this item will save the current settings of your Options
menu to your @code{init.el} file so that the next time you start SXEmacs,
you won't need to select the options again.
@end table


@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Buffers Menu, Help menu, Options Menu, Pull-down Menus
@subsection The Buffers Menu
@cindex Buffers menu
The @b{Buffers} menu provides a selection of up to ten buffers and the
item @b{List All Buffers}, which provides a Buffer List. If you select
@b{Buffers Sub-menus} from the @b{Options} menu, you will get some
sub-menus for each of the buffer listing.


@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Help menu,  , Buffers Menu, Pull-down Menus
@subsection The Help Menu
@cindex Help menu

The Help Menu gives you access to Emacs Info and provides a menu
equivalent for some of the choices you have when using @kbd{C-h}.
@xref{Help}, for more information.

The @b{Describe variable} and @b{Describe function} will provide
documentation for the corresponding variable or function. The Help menu
also gives access to UNIX online manual pages via the @b{UNIX Manual...}
option.
