-*- mode:outline -*-

* Introduction
==============

This file presents the changes in recent SXEmacs versions.  It
primarily documents user-visible (interface) changes, but also
includes internal changes of possible interest to the users.  When
describing new features, we try to also document ways of reverting to
the old behavior, where applicable.  If you dislike a recent change in
how SXEmacs behaves, this file might contain a remedy.

Use `C-c C-f' to move to the next equal level of outline, and
`C-c C-b' to move to previous equal level.  `C-h m' will give more
info about the Outline mode.  Many commands are also available through
the menubar.

Users who would like to know which capabilities have been introduced
in each release should look at the appropriate section of this file.



* Changes in SXEmacs 22.1.4 (Bentley Turbo)
===========================================

** Many more image formats via FFI/libWand -- Freundt.

FFI-enabled SXEmacs can load up libWand and thus display any image
format that libWand (ImageMagick) supports.

** Lots of updates to the ENT (Enhanced Number Types) code -- Freundt.

** Mule is on by default -- Youngs.

** Embeddable keyboard macros -- Kuehl.

This means that the following sort of thing is possible:

      C-x ( bar C-x )
      C-x ( foo C-x e C-x )
    
      C-x e
      => foo bar

** Default widgets/dialogs to Athena instead of Motif -- Youngs.

** OpenSSL updates -- Freundt.

Digest, encryption, and decryption routines that operate on files has
been added.  Previously this was only available for buffers.

** Build reports have been revamped -- Youngs, Freundt.

The SXEmacs build report no longer conflicts with the XEmacs
build-report.el.  Plus ours also reports on shared lib dependencies
and config.h stuff.  Sending from Gnus is also supported.

** FFI updates/fixes -- Youngs, Zajcev, Freundt.

** Ability to build postscript, pdf, and html docs -- Ferreira.

** Double linked lists and bloom filters implemented -- Freundt.

Bloom filters are a space and time-efficient way to decide about the
membership of an element to a given set. Using lisp-lists or vectors,
one usually has to traverse the entire list or vector, before
membership can be decided.  Using hash tables, membership decision is
in O(1) (bloom filters also decide in O(1)), but the hash-table's size
grows proportionally with the number n of elements, thus its space
complexity is O(n), whereas Bloom filters take a constant amount of
space regardless how many elements are in it.

** Lightning fast recursive version of directory-files -- Freundt.

It's called `directory-files-recur' and in some situations it is even
faster than GNU's find(1).

** Portuguese added to etc/HELLO -- Ferreira.

** Massive improvements, enhancements for multimedia (audio) -- Freundt.

SXEmacs supports several "sound servers" like: OSS, NAS, ESD, Polypaudio,
ALSA, aRts, and Jack.  And media streams can be handled by sndfile, ffmpeg,
sox, mad, xine, gstreamer.  The SXEmacs developers recommend Polyp/ffmpeg
whenever possible.

And yes, SXEmacs _can_ play mp3 files. :-)

** Autoconf fixes/updates -- Youngs, Freundt.

All of the enable/disable options have been converted to with/without
options.  This allows us to sort them into groups.

Also fixes were made to allow building on FreeBSD and NetBSD.

** Big update for the FAQ -- Youngs, Freundt.

** Server Sockets! -- Ferreira.

SXEmacs now has server sockets (Yay!).  See
`open-network-server-stream'.

** Compiler fixes (gcc 2.95) -- Freundt.

** bug-reporter update -- Youngs.

`report-sxemacs-bug' now directs people to our BugZilla installation
at http://issues.sxemacs.org/

** Documentation updates/fixes/improvements -- Youngs, Ferreira, Freundt.


* Changes in SXEmacs 22.1.3 (BMW)
=================================

** OpenSSL updates, improvements, and fixes -- Freundt.

** FFI updates, and fixes -- Zajcev.

FFI now defaults to "on" if libffi can be found at configure time.  It
you don't want this, use: `--disable-ffi'.

FTP downloads with `curl:download' is working properly now.  And with
HTTP transfers you can transfer just the HTTP header for a file if you
wish.

** Extent/glyph fixes -- Sidwell, Kuehl.

** 32 mouse buttons supported -- Youngs.

(global-set-key [(button32)] 'some-function) is valid in SXEmacs.

** Modeline tweaks -- Ferreira.

Move line/column number indicators to left side (aka XE 21.5)

** M-x uptime -- Youngs.

Every good OS has an uptime util, SXEmacs is no exception.  Reports
uptime in various formats.

** ia64 build fixes -- Lesjak.

** `C-h n' will no longer find NEWS files from packages -- Youngs.

** List of package mirrors updated -- Aichner, Skyttä.

** Bootstrappable PUI -- Youngs.

SXEmacs no longer needs to have _any_ packages pre-installed before
PUI can be used.  See (Info-goto-node "(sxemacs)Bootstrapping PUI").

** Bignums, and a whole swag of sexy new number goodness -- Freundt.

Bignums, bigfloats, and ratios that you may know from XEmacs 21.5 are
now in SXEmacs.  That and a whole lot more...

Features provided when all of the library demands are met:
    
  (featurep 'bigz) and 
  (featurep 'bignum)       <=> if MPZ from GMP or BSD MP is present
  
  (featurep 'bigq) and
  (featurep 'ratio)        <=> if MPQ from GMP is present
  
  (featurep 'bigf) and
  (featurep 'bigfloat)     <=> if MPF from GMP is present
  
  (featurep 'bigfr)        <=> if MPFR is present
  
  (featurep 'bigc)         <=> if MPC is present
  
  (featurep 'number-types) <=> if one of the above features is
  provided

For complete details see: (Info-goto-node "(lispref)Enhanced Number Types")

** Raw strings -- Kuehl.

SXEmacs tries to relieve backslashitis by implementing raw strings.
You'll imediately notice the benefit of raw strings when use them for
those hairy regexps.  Consider the regular expression (from
font-latex.el)... 

  "\\(?:^\\|[^\\]\\)\\(?:\\\\\\\\\\)*\\(\\\\[@A-Za-z]+\\)"

As a raw string it could be written as...

  #r"\(?:^\|[^\]\)\(?:\)*\(\\[@A-Za-z]+\)"

Most of the SXEmacs core lisp code has been converted over to using
raw strings whereever appropriate.

** Improved font-locking in a TTY -- Ferreira.

To illustrate this...

  $ sxemacs -nw -vanilla

...and look at the modeline.  Now open a .c file and turn on
font-lock... 

  C-x C-f /path/to/file.c RET
  M-x font-lock-mode RET

** Compiler fixes -- Zajcev.

** SXEmacs can no longer be built with a C++ compiler -- Youngs.

To build SXEmacs you will need a C compiler at least the equivalent of
GCC 2.95.3.  Building with a C++ compiler is no longer supported.

** Autoconf fixes, updates -- Freundt, Kuehl, Youngs.

All autoconf options now have a help string (for ./configure --help)
and the default setting for each option is noted.

** PostgreSQL auto-detection improved -- Youngs.

If pg_config is in your $PATH, SXEmacs will add PostgreSQL support at
configure/build time.

** Documentation (Texinfo) updates -- Freundt, Youngs.

The SXEmacs manual is now called "sxemacs" instead of "xemacs".  C-h
C-i sxemacs RET to read it.

Most of the Texinfo docs now have been updated to say "SXEmacs"
whereever appropriate instead of "XEmacs".

** GTK (version 1.2) build fixes -- Youngs.


* Changes in SXEmacs 22.1.2 (Audi)
==================================

** autoconf 2.59 compatible configure scripts -- Youngs, Purvis.

Many configure options have changed.  Please run `./configure --help'
to see what the new options are.

** Most win32 code is now gone -- Youngs, Freundt.

** `describe-installation' report libc version on Slackware -- Youngs.

** etags.c updated to Francesco's version 17.11 -- Youngs.

** Support `ls --dired' properly -- Sperber.

** FFI (Foreign Function Interface) updates -- Zajcev.

One of the most exciting things is that this version of SXEmacs can
download files from the internet _without_ the need of any XEmacs
packages being installed.  If you have libcurl and enable FFI in
SXEmacs at build time, you can:

	(require 'ffi-curl)
	(curl:download "http://www.somedomain.com/path/file"
	               "/tmp/file")

To put your mind at ease, libcurl is _NOT_ needed to build SXEmacs.
The above will work even if you install libcurl after
building/installing SXEmacs.

** Don't echo GC messages for non-string GC'ing -- Zajcev.

This drastically reduces the number of "Garbage Collecting" messages
that you see in the echo area.  Garbage collection is still happening,
it is just not in your face as much.

** movemail.c security fixes -- Oskarsson.

** PUI's *packages* buffer enhancements -- Koch.

** Saner fallbacks for `backup-buffer' -- Youngs.

Based on an idea from JWZ, if the backup can't be written, try in
`auto-save-directory', and if that fails, fall back to $HOME.

** OpenSSL support -- Freundt.

Of course. The OpenSSL library itself is actually separated into two
libraries: libcrypto and libssl.  libcrypto is the part which comes to
elisp with the current API.  libssl is planned for the near future.

With this interface/gateway we now have access to the wonderful world
of static cryptography (static here means no handshake/protocols/etc.).

The API contains:

- the OpenSSL PRNG = (pseudo) random number generator to provide
  generating cryptographically secure randomness

- the OpenSSL MDs (message digests) to provide all sorts of hashing
  (we had an md5 implementation already)

- the HMAC aka keyed hashing aka message authentication code to provide
  hashes secured by a password

- the CIPHER engine (i.e. symmetric crypto systems) to provide
  encryption/decryption routines secured by a password

- the PKEY engine (i.e. asymmetric crypto systems) to provide generation
  and distribution of private/public key pairs (as probably known by
  gpg)

- the HYBRIDe engine aka PKCS aka public key crypto systems to provide
  encryption based on (foreign) public keys and decryption with own
  private keys to provide also digital signatures and verification (as
  probably known by gpg)

** Remove most of the generated files from the repo -- Youngs, Freundt.

** Allow suppression of WM decorations -- Turnbull.

This makes balloon-help windows infinitely better behaved.  Thank you
very much, Steve T.

** Fontify *scratch* buffer according to user's settings -- Kehoe.

** Fix bug hanging SXEmacs when yanking > 260kb -- Kehoe.

** lispref manual updated for SXEmacs -- Freundt.

** PostgreSQL updates (mainly doc updates) -- Frenudt.


* Changes in SXEmacs 22.1.1 (Aston Martin)
==========================================

** user-init-directory set to ~/.sxemacs -- Youngs.

Symlinking this to your old ~/.xemacs directory is enough to get up
and running with SXEmacs.

** Packages hierarchy default set to $prefix/lib/sxemacs -- Youngs.

Symlinking this to your old $prefix/lib/xemacs directory is enough to
get up and running with SXEmacs.  SXEmacs will do this for you when
you do `make install'.

** Rename items in the menubar -- Slusar, Youngs.

** Beginnings of FFI -- Zajcev.

FFI is "Foreign Function Interface" and will allow access to functions
and libraries outside of SXEmacs from within lisp.  Not completed yet,
but the basic infrastructure is in place.

** FreeBSD build fixes -- Slusar.

** M-x report-sxemacs-bug -- Youngs.

For now, this is just a wrapper around report-xemacs-bug with the
appropriate variables set to SXEmacs values.

** Fix etags.c -- Slusar.

Avoid a segv.

** M-x build-report -- Youngs.

Make it work for SXEmacs.

** Fix major bug in regex.c

This fixed a whole swag of crashes involving regexps and
syntax-tables. 

** Sync up with XEmacs 21.4 -- Various Developers.


* Changes in SXEmacs 22.1.0 (Alfa Romeo)
========================================

This is the first release of SXEmacs.  It is a fork of XEmacs
21.4.16.  The vast majority of the changes between SXEmacs 22.1.0 and
the code it descended from, XEmacs 21.4.16, are purely renaming
"XEmacs" to "SXEmacs".
