@node Reading Mail, Calendar/Diary, Sending Mail, Top
@chapter Reading Mail
@cindex mail
@cindex message

SXEmacs provides several mail-reading packages.  Each one comes with
its own manual, which is included in each package.

The recommended mail-reading package for new users is VM.  VM works
with standard Unix-mail-format folders and was designed as a replacement
for the older Rmail.

SXEmacs also provides a sophisticated and comfortable front-end to the
MH mail-processing system, called @samp{MH-E}.  Unlike in other
mail programs, folders in MH are stored as file-system directories,
with each message occupying one (numbered) file.  This facilitates
working with mail using shell commands, and many other features of
MH are also designed to integrate well with the shell and with
shell scripts.  Keep in mind, however, that in order to use MH-E
you must have the MH mail-processing system installed on your
computer.

The @dfn{Everything including the kitchen sink} package @samp{Gnus} is
also available as an SXEmacs package.  Gnus also handles Usenet articles
as well as mail.

@samp{MEW} (Messaging in the Emacs World) is another mail-reading
package available for SXEmacs.

Finally, SXEmacs provides the Rmail package.  Rmail is (currently)
the only mail reading package distributed with FSF GNU Emacs, and is
powerful in its own right.  However, it stores mail folders in a
special format called @samp{Babyl}, that is incompatible with all
other frequently-used mail programs.  A utility program is provided
for converting Babyl folders to standard Unix-mail format; however,
unless you already have mail in Babyl-format folders, you should
consider using Gnus, VM, or MH-E instead.
