\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename sxemacs.info
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up


@ifinfo
@dircategory SXEmacs Editor
@direntry
* SXEmacs: (sxemacs).		SXEmacs Editor.
@end direntry

This file documents the SXEmacs editor.

Copyright (C) 1985, 1986, 1988 Richard M. Stallman.
Copyright @copyright{} 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 Lucid, Inc.
Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Copyright @copyright{} 1995 Amdahl Corporation.
Copyright @copyright{} 2004 - 2012 Steve Youngs.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying,
provided also that the sections entitled ``Distribution'' and ``GNU
General Public License'' are included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under
the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that the sections entitled ``Distribution'' and ``GNU
General Public License'' may be included in a translation approved by
the author instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo
@c
@setchapternewpage odd
@settitle SXEmacs User's Manual
@c
@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{SXEmacs User's Manual}
@sp 4
@sp 1
@sp 1
@center July 1994
@center (General Public License upgraded, January 1991)
@sp 5
@center Richard Stallman
@sp 1
@center Lucid, Inc.
@sp 1
@center and
@sp 1
@center Ben Wing
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1985, 1986, 1988 Richard M. Stallman.

Copyright @copyright{} 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994  Lucid, Inc.

Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994 Sun Microsystems, Inc.

Copyright @copyright{} 1995 Amdahl Corporation.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
that the sections entitled ``Distribution'' and ``GNU General Public
License'' are included exactly as in the original, and provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that the sections entitled ``Distribution'' and ``GNU
General Public License'' may be included in a translation approved by
the author instead of in the original English.
@end titlepage
@page
@ifnottex
@node Top, License,, (dir)
@top The SXEmacs Editor


SXEmacs is the extensible, customizable, self-documenting real-time
display editor.  This Info file describes how to edit with Emacs
and some of how to customize it, but not how to extend it.  It
corresponds to: v22.1.15

Although, it hasn't had a complete rewrite for quite some time.

This manual is intended as a detailed reference to SXEmacs.  If
you are looking for an introductory manual, see the New User's
Guide.

@end ifnottex
@menu
* License::     The GNU General Public License gives you permission
		to redistribute SXEmacs on certain terms; and also
		explains that there is no warranty.
* Distrib::     How to get SXEmacs.
* Intro::       An introduction to SXEmacs concepts.
* Glossary::    The glossary.

Indices, nodes containing large menus
* Key Index::      An item for each standard SXEmacs key sequence.
* Command Index::  An item for each command name.
* Variable Index:: An item for each documented variable.
* Concept Index::  An item for each concept.

Important General Concepts
* Frame::      How to interpret what you see on the screen.
* Keystrokes::  Keyboard gestures SXEmacs recognizes.
* Pull-down Menus::
                The SXEmacs Pull-down Menus available under X.
* Entering Emacs::
                Starting Emacs from the shell.
* Exiting::     Stopping or killing SXEmacs.
* Command Switches::
                Hairy startup options.
* Startup Paths::
                How SXEmacs finds Directories and Files.
* Packages::    How SXEmacs organizes its high-level functionality.

Fundamental Editing Commands
* Basic::       The most basic editing commands.
* Undo::        Undoing recently made changes in the text.
* Minibuffer::  Entering arguments that are prompted for.
* M-x::         Invoking commands by their names.
* Help::        Commands for asking SXEmacs about its commands.

Important Text-Changing Commands
* Mark::        The mark: how to delimit a ``region'' of text.
* Mouse Selection::
                Selecting text with the mouse.
* Additional Mouse Operations::
                Other operations available from the mouse.
* Killing::     Killing text.
* Yanking::     Recovering killed text.  Moving text.
* Using X Selections::
                Using primary selection, cut buffers, and highlighted regions.
* Accumulating Text::
                Other ways of copying text.
* Rectangles::  Operating on the text inside a rectangle on the screen.
* Registers::   Saving a text string or a location in the buffer.
* Display::     Controlling what text is displayed.
* Search::      Finding or replacing occurrences of a string.
* Fixit::       Commands especially useful for fixing typos.

Larger Units of Text
* Files::       All about handling files.
* Buffers::     Multiple buffers; editing several files at once.
* Windows::     Viewing two pieces of text at once.
* Mule::	Using world scripts.

Advanced Features
* Major Modes:: Text mode vs. Lisp mode vs. C mode ...
* Indentation:: Editing the white space at the beginnings of lines.
* Text::        Commands and modes for editing English.
* Programs::    Commands and modes for editing programs.
* Running::     Compiling, running and debugging programs.
* Abbrevs::     How to define text abbreviations to reduce
                 the number of characters you must type.
* Picture::     Editing pictures made up of characters
                 using the quarter-plane screen model.
* Sending Mail:: Sending mail in SXEmacs.
* Reading Mail:: Reading mail in SXEmacs.
* Calendar/Diary:: A Calendar and diary facility in SXEmacs.
* Sorting::	Sorting lines, paragraphs or pages within SXEmacs.
* Shell::       Executing shell commands from SXEmacs.
* Narrowing::   Restricting display and editing to a portion
                 of the buffer.
* Hardcopy::	Printing buffers or regions.
* Recursive Edit::
                A command can allow you to do editing
                 "within the command".  This is called a
                 `recursive editing level'.
* Dissociated Press::  Dissociating text for fun.
* CONX::	       A different kind of dissociation.
* Amusements::         Various games and hacks.
* Emulation::	       Emulating some other editors with SXEmacs.
* Customization::      Modifying the behavior of SXEmacs.

Recovery from Problems.
* Quitting::    Quitting and aborting.
* Lossage::     What to do if SXEmacs is hung or malfunctioning.
* Bugs::        How and when to report a bug.

Here are some other nodes which are really inferiors of the ones
already listed, mentioned here so you can get to them in one step:

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

The Organization of the Frame

* Point::	        The place in the text where editing commands operate.
* Echo Area::           Short messages appear at the bottom of the frame.
* Mode Line::	        Interpreting the mode line.
* SXEmacs under X::      Some information on using SXEmacs under the X
                        Window System.

Keystrokes

* Intro to Keystrokes::      Keystrokes as building blocks of key sequences.
* Representing Keystrokes::  Using lists of modifiers and keysyms to
                             represent keystrokes.
* Key Sequences::            Combine key strokes into key sequences you can
                             bind to commands.
* String Key Sequences::     Available for upward compatibility.
* Meta Key::                 Using @key{ESC} to represent @key{Meta}
* Super and Hyper Keys::     Adding modifier keys on certain keyboards.
* Character Representation:: How characters appear in SXEmacs buffers.
* Commands::                 How commands are bound to key sequences.

Pull-down Menus

* File Menu::           Items on the File menu.
* Edit Menu::           Items on the Edit menu.
* Apps Menu::		Items on the Apps menu.
* Options Menu::        Items on the Options menu.
* Buffers Menu::        Information about the Buffers menu.
* Tools Menu::		Items on the Tools menu.
* Help Menu::           Items on the Help menu.
* Menu Customization::  Adding and removing menu items and related
                        operations.

Packages

* Packages::            Introduction to SXEmacs Packages.
* Package Terminology:: Understanding different kinds of packages.
* Installing Packages:: How to install packages.
* Building Packages::   Building packages from sources.
* Local.rules File::    An important part of building packages.
* Available Packages::  A brief directory of packaged LISP.

Basic Editing Commands

* Blank Lines::        Commands to make or delete blank lines.
* Continuation Lines:: Lines too wide for the frame.
* Position Info::      What page, line, row, or column is point on?
* Arguments::	       Numeric arguments for repeating a command.

The Minibuffer

* File: Minibuffer File.  Entering file names with the minibuffer.
* Edit: Minibuffer Edit.  How to edit in the minibuffer.
* Completion::		  An abbreviation facility for minibuffer input.
* Repetition::		  Re-executing commands that used the minibuffer.

The Mark and the Region

* Setting Mark::	Commands to set the mark.
* Using Region::	Summary of ways to operate on contents of the region.
* Marking Objects::	Commands to put region around textual units.
* Mark Ring::   	Previous mark positions saved so you can go back there.

Yanking

* Kill Ring::       Where killed text is stored.  Basic yanking.
* Appending Kills:: Several kills in a row all yank together.
* Earlier Kills::   Yanking something killed some time ago.

Using X Selections

* X Clipboard Selection::     	Pasting to the X clipboard.
* X Selection Commands::	Other operations on the selection.
* X Cut Buffers::       	X cut buffers are available for compatibility.
* Active Regions::      	Using zmacs-style highlighting of the
                        	 selected region.

Registers

* Position: RegPos.           Saving positions in registers.
* Text: RegText.              Saving text in registers.
* Rectangle: RegRect.         Saving rectangles in registers.
* Configurations: RegConfig.  Saving window configurations in registers.
* Files: RegFiles.            File names in registers.
* Numbers: RegNumbers.        Numbers in registers.
* Bookmarks::                 Bookmarks are like registers, but persistent.

Controlling the Display

* Scrolling::	           Moving text up and down in a window.
* Horizontal Scrolling::   Moving text left and right in a window.
* Selective Display::      Hiding lines with lots of indentation.
* Display Vars::           Information on variables for customizing display.

Searching and Replacement

* Incremental Search::     Search happens as you type the string.
* Non-Incremental Search:: Specify entire string and then search.
* Word Search::            Search for sequence of words.
* Regexp Search::          Search for match for a regexp.
* Regexps::                Syntax of regular expressions.
* Search Case::            To ignore case while searching, or not.
* Replace::                Search, and replace some or all matches.
* Other Repeating Search:: Operating on all matches for some regexp.

Replacement Commands

* Unconditional Replace::  Replacing all matches for a string.
* Regexp Replace::         Replacing all matches for a regexp.
* Replacement and Case::   How replacements preserve case of letters.
* Query Replace::          How to use querying.

Commands for Fixing Typos

* Kill Errors:: Commands to kill a batch of recently entered text.
* Transpose::   Exchanging two characters, words, lines, lists...
* Fixing Case:: Correcting case of last word entered.
* Spelling::    Apply spelling checker to a word, or a whole file.

File Handling

* File Names::       How to type and edit file name arguments.
* Visiting::         Visiting a file prepares SXEmacs to edit the file.
* Saving::           Saving makes your changes permanent.
* Reverting::        Reverting cancels all the changes not saved.
* Auto Save::        Auto Save periodically protects against loss of data.
* Version Control::  Version control systems (RCS and SCCS).
* ListDir::          Listing the contents of a file directory.
* Comparing Files::  Finding where two files differ.
* Dired::            ``Editing'' a directory to delete, rename, etc.
                     the files in it.
* Misc File Ops::    Other things you can do on files.

Saving Files

* Backup::       How SXEmacs saves the old version of your file.
* Interlocking:: How SXEmacs protects against simultaneous editing
                  of one file by two users.

Backup Files

* Names: Backup Names.		How backup files are named;
				Choosing single or numbered backup files.
* Deletion: Backup Deletion.	SXEmacs deletes excess numbered backups.
* Copying: Backup Copying.	Backups can be made by copying or renaming.

Auto-Saving: Protection Against Disasters

* Files: Auto Save Files.
* Control: Auto Save Control.
* Recover::		Recovering text from auto-save files.

Version Control

* Concepts of VC::		Basic version control information;
				  checking files in and out.
* Editing with VC::		Commands for editing a file maintained
				  with version control.
* Variables for Check-in/out::	Variables that affect the commands used
				  to check files in or out.
* Log Entries::			Logging your changes.
* Change Logs and VC::		Generating a change log file from log
				  entries.
* Old Versions::		Examining and comparing old versions.
* VC Status::			Commands to view the VC status of files and
				  look at log entries.
* Renaming and VC::		A command to rename both the source and
				  master file correctly.
* Snapshots::			How to make and use snapshots, a set of
				  file versions that can be treated as a unit.
* Version Headers::		Inserting version control headers into
				  working files.

Snapshots

* Making Snapshots::		The snapshot facilities.
* Snapshot Caveats::		Things to be careful of when using snapshots.

Dired, the Directory Editor

* Enter: Dired Enter.         How to invoke Dired.
* Edit: Dired Edit.           Editing the Dired buffer.
* Deletion: Dired Deletion.   Deleting files with Dired.
* Immed: Dired Immed.         Other file operations through Dired.

Using Multiple Buffers

* Select Buffer::   Creating a new buffer or reselecting an old one.
* List Buffers::    Getting a list of buffers that exist.
* Misc Buffer::     Renaming; changing read-onliness; copying text.
* Kill Buffer::     Killing buffers you no longer need.
* Several Buffers:: How to go through the list of all buffers
                     and operate variously on several of them.

Multiple Windows

* Basic Window::     Introduction to SXEmacs windows.
* Split Window::     New windows are made by splitting existing windows.
* Other Window::     Moving to another window or doing something to it.
* Pop Up Window::    Finding a file or buffer in another window.
* Change Window::    Deleting windows and changing their sizes.

Major Modes

* Choosing Modes::     How major modes are specified or chosen.

Indentation

* Indentation Commands:: Various commands and techniques for indentation.
* Tab Stops::            You can set arbitrary "tab stops" and then
                         indent to the next tab stop when you want to.
* Just Spaces::          You can request indentation using just spaces.

Commands for Human Languages

* Text Mode::   The major modes for editing text files.
* Nroff Mode::  The major mode for editing input to the formatter nroff.
* TeX Mode::    The major modes for editing input to the formatter TeX.
* Outline Mode:: The major mode for editing outlines.
* Words::       Moving over and killing words.
* Sentences::   Moving over and killing sentences.
* Paragraphs::	Moving over paragraphs.
* Pages::	Moving over pages.
* Filling::     Filling or justifying text
* Case::        Changing the case of text

@TeX{} Mode

* Editing: TeX Editing.   Special commands for editing in TeX mode.
* Printing: TeX Print.    Commands for printing part of a file with TeX.

Outline Mode

* Format: Outline Format.	  What the text of an outline looks like.
* Motion: Outline Motion.	  Special commands for moving through outlines.
* Visibility: Outline Visibility. Commands to control what is visible.

Filling Text

* Auto Fill::	  Auto Fill mode breaks long lines automatically.
* Fill Commands:: Commands to refill paragraphs and center lines.
* Fill Prefix::   Filling when every line is indented or in a comment, etc.

Editing Programs

* Program Modes::       Major modes for editing programs.
* Lists::               Expressions with balanced parentheses.
                         There are editing commands to operate on them.
* Defuns::              Each program is made up of separate functions.
                         There are editing commands to operate on them.
* Grinding::            Adjusting indentation to show the nesting.
* Matching::            Insertion of a close-delimiter flashes matching open.
* Comments::            Inserting, filling and aligning comments.
* Balanced Editing::    Inserting two matching parentheses at once, etc.
* Lisp Completion::     Completion on symbol names in Lisp code.
* Documentation::       Getting documentation of functions you plan to call.
* Change Log::          Maintaining a change history for your program.
* Tags::                Go directly to any function in your program in one
                         command.  Tags remembers which file it is in.
* CC Mode::             Modes for C, C++, Java and similar languages
* Fortran::		Fortran mode and its special features.
* Asm Mode::            Asm mode and its special features.

Indentation for Programs

* Basic Indent::
* Multi-line Indent::   Commands to reindent many lines at once.
* Lisp Indent::		Specifying how each Lisp function should be indented.

Tags Tables

* Tag Syntax::		Tag syntax for various types of code and text files.
* Create Tags Table::	Creating a tags table with @code{etags}.
* Select Tags Table::	How to visit a tags table.
* Find Tag::		Commands to find the definition of a specific tag.
* Tags Search::		Using a tags table for searching and replacing.
* List Tags::		Listing and finding tags defined in a file.

Fortran Mode

* Motion: Fortran Motion.     Moving point by statements or subprograms.
* Indent: Fortran Indent.     Indentation commands for Fortran.
* Comments: Fortran Comments. Inserting and aligning comments.
* Columns: Fortran Columns.   Measuring columns for valid Fortran.
* Abbrev: Fortran Abbrev.     Built-in abbrevs for Fortran keywords.

Fortran Indentation

* Commands: ForIndent Commands. Commands for indenting Fortran.
* Numbers:  ForIndent Num.      How line numbers auto-indent.
* Conv:     ForIndent Conv.     Conventions you must obey to avoid trouble.
* Vars:     ForIndent Vars.     Variables controlling Fortran indent style.

Compiling and Testing Programs

* Compilation::        Compiling programs in languages other than Lisp
                        (C, Pascal, etc.)
* Modes: Lisp Modes.   Various modes for editing Lisp programs, with
                       different facilities for running the Lisp programs.
* Libraries: Lisp Libraries.      Creating Lisp programs to run in SXEmacs.
* Eval: Lisp Eval.     Executing a single Lisp expression in SXEmacs.
* Debug: Lisp Debug.   Debugging Lisp programs running in SXEmacs.
* Interaction: Lisp Interaction.  Executing Lisp in an SXEmacs buffer.
* External Lisp::      Communicating through SXEmacs with a separate Lisp.

Lisp Libraries

* Loading::		Loading libraries of Lisp code into SXEmacs for use.
* Compiling Libraries:: Compiling a library makes it load and run faster.
* Mocklisp::		Converting Mocklisp to Lisp so SXEmacs can run it.

Abbrevs

* Defining Abbrevs::  Defining an abbrev, so it will expand when typed.
* Expanding Abbrevs:: Controlling expansion: prefixes, canceling expansion.
* Editing Abbrevs::   Viewing or editing the entire list of defined abbrevs.
* Saving Abbrevs::    Saving the entire list of abbrevs for another session.
* Dynamic Abbrevs::   Abbreviations for words already in the buffer.

Editing Pictures

* Basic Picture::         Basic concepts and simple commands of Picture Mode.
* Insert in Picture::     Controlling direction of cursor motion
                           after "self-inserting" characters.
* Tabs in Picture::       Various features for tab stops and indentation.
* Rectangles in Picture:: Clearing and superimposing rectangles.

Sending Mail

* Format: Mail Format.    Format of the mail being composed.
* Headers: Mail Headers.  Details of allowed mail header fields.
* Mode: Mail Mode.        Special commands for editing mail being composed.

Running Shell Commands from SXEmacs

* Single Shell::         How to run one shell command and return.
* Interactive Shell::    Permanent shell taking input via SXEmacs.
* Shell Mode::           Special SXEmacs commands used with permanent shell.

Customization

* Minor Modes::     Each minor mode is one feature you can turn on
                     independently of any others.
* Variables::       Many SXEmacs commands examine SXEmacs variables
                     to decide what to do; by setting variables,
                     you can control their functioning.
* Keyboard Macros:: A keyboard macro records a sequence of keystrokes
                     to be replayed with a single command.
* Key Bindings::    The keymaps say what command each key runs.
                     By changing them, you can "redefine keys".
* Syntax::          The syntax table controls how words and expressions
                     are parsed.
* Init File::       How to write common customizations in the init file.
* Audible Bell::    Changing how SXEmacs sounds the bell.
* Faces::           Changing the fonts and colors of a region of text.
* X Resources::	    X resources controlling various aspects of the
                     behavior of SXEmacs.

Variables

* Examining::           Examining or setting one variable's value.
* Easy Customization::  Convenient and easy customization of variables.
* Edit Options::        Examining or editing list of all variables' values.
* Locals::              Per-buffer values of variables.
* File Variables::      How files can specify variable values.

Keyboard Macros

* Basic Kbd Macro::     Defining and running keyboard macros.
* Save Kbd Macro::      Giving keyboard macros names; saving them in files.
* Kbd Macro Query::     Keyboard macros that do different things each use.

Customizing Key Bindings

* Keymaps::    Definition of the keymap data structure.
               Names of SXEmacs's standard keymaps.
* Rebinding::  How to redefine one key's meaning conveniently.
* Disabling::  Disabling a command means confirmation is required
                before it can be executed.  This is done to protect
                beginners from surprises.

The Syntax Table

* Entry: Syntax Entry.    What the syntax table records for each character.
* Change: Syntax Change.  How to change the information.

The Init File

* Init Syntax::     Syntax of constants in Emacs Lisp.
* Init Examples::   How to do some things with an init file.
* Terminal Init::   Each terminal type can have an init file.

Dealing with SXEmacs Trouble

* Stuck Recursive::    `[...]' in mode line around the parentheses.
* Screen Garbled::     Garbage on the screen.
* Text Garbled::       Garbage in the text.
* Unasked-for Search:: Spontaneous entry to incremental search.
* Emergency Escape::   Emergency escape---
                        What to do if SXEmacs stops responding.
* Total Frustration::  When you are at your wits' end.

@end menu

@iftex
@unnumbered Preface

  This manual documents the use and simple customization of the SXEmacs
editor.  The reader is not expected to be a programmer to use this
editor, and simple customizations do not require programming skills either.
Users who are not interested in customizing SXEmacs can ignore the scattered
customization hints.

  This document is primarily a reference manual, but it can also be used as a
primer.  However, if you are new to SXEmacs, consider using the on-line,
learn-by-doing tutorial, which you get by running SXEmacs and typing
@kbd{C-h t}.  With it, you learn SXEmacs by using SXEmacs on a specially
designed file which describes commands, tells you when to try them,
and then explains the results you see.  Using the tutorial gives a more vivid
introduction than the printed manual.  Also consider reading the SXEmacs
New User's Guide, which is intended specifically as an introductory
manual rather than as a reference guide.

  On first reading, just skim chapters one and two, which describe the
notational conventions of the manual and the general appearance of the
SXEmacs display frame.  Note which questions are answered in these chapters,
so you can refer back later.  After reading chapter four you should
practice the commands there.  The next few chapters describe fundamental
techniques and concepts that are used constantly.  You need to understand
them thoroughly, experimenting with them if necessary.

  To find the documentation on a particular command, look in the index.
Keys (character commands) and command names have separate indexes.  There
is also a glossary, with a cross reference for each term.

@ignore
  If you know vaguely what the command
does, look in the command summary.  The command summary contains a line or
two about each command, and a cross reference to the section of the
manual that describes the command in more detail; related commands
are grouped together.
@end ignore

  This manual comes in two forms: the published form and the Info form.
The Info form is for on-line perusal with the INFO program; it is
distributed along with SXEmacs.  Both forms contain substantially the
same text and are generated from a common source file, which is also
distributed along with SXEmacs.

  SXEmacs is a member of the Emacs editor family.  There are many Emacs
editors, all sharing common principles of organization.  For information on
the underlying philosophy of Emacs and the lessons learned from its
development, write for a copy of AI memo 519a, ``Emacs, the Extensible,
Customizable Self-Documenting Display Editor'', to Publications Department,
Artificial Intelligence Lab, 545 Tech Square, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.  At
last report they charge $2.25 per copy.  Another useful publication is LCS
TM-165, ``A Cookbook for an Emacs'', by Craig Finseth, available from
Publications Department, Laboratory for Computer Science, 545 Tech Square,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.  The price today is $3.

This manual is for SXEmacs installed on UNIX systems.
@end iftex

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node License, Distrib, Top, Top
@include gpl.texi
@node Distrib, Intro, License, Top
@unnumbered Distribution

SXEmacs is @dfn{free}; this means that everyone is free to use it and
free to redistribute it on a free basis.  SXEmacs is not in the public
domain; it is copyrighted and there are restrictions on its
distribution, but these restrictions are designed to permit everything
that a good cooperating citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed
is to try to prevent others from further sharing any version of SXEmacs
that they might get from you.  The precise conditions are found in
the GNU General Public License that comes with SXEmacs and also appears
following this section.

The easiest way to get a copy of SXEmacs is from someone else who has it.
You need not ask for permission to do so, or tell any one else; just copy
it.

If you have access to the Internet, you can get the latest version of
SXEmacs from the anonymous FTP server @file{ftp.sxemacs.org} in the directory
@file{/pub/sxemacs}.  It can also be found at numerous other archive
sites around the world; check the file @file{etc/DISTRIB} in an SXEmacs
distribution for the latest known list.


@unnumberedsec Getting Other Versions of Emacs

The Free Software Foundation's version of Emacs (called @dfn{FSF Emacs}
in this manual and often referred to as @dfn{GNU Emacs}) is available
by anonymous FTP from @file{prep.ai.mit.edu}.

@node Intro, Glossary, Distrib, Top
@unnumbered Introduction

  You are reading about SXEmacs, an incarnation of the advanced,
self-documenting, customizable, extensible real-time display editor
Emacs.  SXEmacs provides many powerful display and user-interface
capabilities not found in other Emacsen and is mostly upwardly
compatible with GNU Emacs from the Free Software Foundation
(referred to as @dfn{FSF Emacs} in this manual).  SXEmacs also
comes standard with a great number of useful packages.

  We say that SXEmacs is a @dfn{display} editor because normally the text
being edited is visible on the screen and is updated automatically as you
type.  @xref{Frame,Display}.

  We call SXEmacs a @dfn{real-time} editor because the display is updated very
frequently, usually after each character or pair of characters you
type.  This minimizes the amount of information you must keep in your
head as you edit.  @xref{Basic,Real-time,Basic Editing}.

  We call SXEmacs advanced because it provides facilities that go beyond
simple insertion and deletion: filling of text; automatic indentation of
programs; viewing two or more files at once; and dealing in terms of
characters, words, lines, sentences, paragraphs, and pages, as well as
expressions and comments in several different programming languages.  It is
much easier to type one command meaning ``go to the end of the paragraph''
than to find that spot with simple cursor keys.

  @dfn{Self-documenting} means that at any time you can type a special
character, @kbd{Control-h}, to find out what your options are.  You can
also use @kbd{C-h} to find out what a command does, or to find all the
commands relevant to a topic.  @xref{Help}.

  @dfn{Customizable} means you can change the definitions of SXEmacs
commands.  For example, if you use a programming language in
which comments start with @samp{<**} and end with @samp{**>}, you can tell
the SXEmacs comment manipulation commands to use those strings
(@pxref{Comments}).  Another sort of customization is rearrangement of the
command set.  For example, you can set up the four basic cursor motion
commands (up, down, left and right) on keys in a diamond pattern on the
keyboard if you prefer.  @xref{Customization}.

  @dfn{Extensible} means you can go beyond simple customization and
write entirely new commands, programs in the Lisp language to be run by
SXEmacs' own Lisp interpreter.  SXEmacs is an ``on-line extensible''
system: it is divided into many functions that call each other.  You can
redefine any function in the middle of an editing session and replace
any part of SXEmacs without making a separate copy of all of SXEmacs.  Most
of the editing commands of SXEmacs are written in Lisp; the few
exceptions could have been written in Lisp but are written in C for
efficiency.  Only a programmer can write an extension to SXEmacs, but anybody
can use it afterward.

@include frame.texi
@include keystrokes.texi
@include menus.texi
@include entering.texi
@include cmdargs.texi
@include startup.texi
@include basic.texi
@include undo.texi
@include mini.texi
@include m-x.texi
@include help.texi
@include mark.texi
@include mouse.texi
@include killing.texi
@include regs.texi
@include display.texi
@include search.texi
@include fixit.texi
@include files.texi
@include buffers.texi
@include windows.texi
@include mule.texi
@include major.texi
@include indent.texi
@include text.texi
@include programs.texi
@include building.texi
@include packages.texi
@include abbrevs.texi
@include picture.texi
@include sending.texi
@include reading.texi
@include calendar.texi
@include misc.texi
@include custom.texi
@include trouble.texi

@include new.texi
@include glossary.texi

@node Key Index, Command Index,, Top
@unnumbered Key (Character) Index
@printindex ky

@node Command Index, Variable Index, Key Index, Top
@unnumbered Command and Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index, Concept Index, Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index, Frame, Variable Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@summarycontents
@contents
@bye


@c Remember to delete these lines before creating the info file.
@iftex
@lucidbook
@bindingoffset = 0.5in
@parindent = 0pt
@end iftex
