\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename emodules.info
@settitle Extending Emacs using C Emodules
@c %**end of header

@set VERSION v3.0
@set LAST_UPDATED May 3rd, 2008

@ifinfo
This file documents the emodule loading technology of SXEmacs.

Copyright @copyright{} 1998 J. Kean Johnston.
Copyright @copyright{} 2007 Sebastian Freundt.
Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Steve Youngs.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Foundation.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation
instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo

@c Combine indices.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@setchapternewpage odd
@finalout

@titlepage
@title Extending SXEmacs using C and C++
@subtitle Version 2.0, September 2007

@author J. Kean Johnston
@author Sebastian Freundt
@author Steve Youngs.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 1998 J. Kean Johnston. @*
Copyright @copyright{} 2007 Sebastian Freundt. @*
Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Steve Youngs. @*

@sp 2
Version @value{VERSION} @*
@value{LAST_UPDATED} @*

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included
exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire resulting
der
ived work is distributed under the terms of a permission notice
identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation
instead of in the original English.
@end titlepage
@page

@ifinfo
@dircategory SXEmacs Editor
@direntry
* Emodules: (emodules).            SXEmacs dynamic loadable emodule support.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top

This Info file contains @value{VERSION} of the SXEmacs dynamic loadable emodule
support documentation.

@menu
* Introduction::                Introducing emodules
* Anatomy of a Emodule::         Basic emodule layout and technology
* Building your Emodule::        How to build emodules
* Defining Functions::          Creating new Lisp primitives
* Defining Variables::          Creating new Lisp variables
* Finding & Loading Emodules::  The module-load-path
* Index::                       Concept Index

@c @c Can't do that when using the simple node structure
@c
@c  --- The Detailed Node Listing ---
@c
@c Anatomy of a Module
@c
@c * Special Header Files::        Better include <emodules-ng.h>
@c * Recognised Functions::        Specially treated functions
@c * Recognised Variables::        Specially treated variables
@c * Loading other Modules::       How to load dependent modules
@c
@c @c @c museum section?
@c @c Using @code{ellcc}
@c @c
@c @c * Compile Mode::                Compiling modules using ellcc
@c @c * Initialization Mode::         Generating documentation and variables
@c @c * Link Mode::                   Creating the final loadable module
@c @c * Other ellcc options::         Other useful options
@c @c * Environment Variables::       How to control ellcc
@c
@c Building your Module
@c
@c * Configuring::                 How to
@c * Compiling and linking::       How to
@c * More Ideas::                  Other things you might want
@c
@c Defining Functions
@c
@c * Using DEFUN::                 Using the DEFUN macro to define functions
@c * Declaring Functions::         Declaring functions to the Lisp reader
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

  SXEmacs is a powerful, extensible editor.  The traditional way of
extending the functionality of SXEmacs is to use its built-in Lisp
language (called Emacs Lisp, or elisp for short).  However, while elisp
is a full programming language and capable of extending SXEmacs in more
ways than you can imagine, it does have its short-comings.

  Firstly, elisp is an interpreted language, and this has serious speed
implications.  Like all other interpreted languages (like Java), elisp
is often suitable only for certain types of application or extension.
So although elisp is a general purpose language, and very high level,
there are times when it is desirable to descend to a lower level compiled
language for speed purposes.

  Secondly, elisp (or Lisp in general) is not a very common language any
more, except for certain circles in the computer industry.  C is a far
more commonly known language, and because it is compiled, more suited to
a wider range of applications, especially those that require low level
access to a system or need to be as quick as possible.

@cindex Emacs Modules
@cindex DLL
@cindex DSO
@cindex shared object
@cindex emodules
  This manual describes a way of extending SXEmacs using dynamic
sharable objects (DSOs aka dynamic loadable modules aka dynamically
loadable libraries, or just simply shared objects), which can
be written in C or C++ (or more generally in anything that can be
compiled to native object code on platforms that support shared
objects).  After the build, they can be loaded into SXEmacs at any
time.

  SXEmacs emodule support is detected and enabled during configure time
by default on all systems that support loading of shared objects,
provided libtool and libltdl is properly installed.  From a users
perspective, the internals of SXEmacs emodules are irrelevant.
All a user will ever need to know about shared objects is the name of
the shared object when they want to load a given emodule.  From a
developers perspective though, a lot more is provided.

@c keep? museum section maybe?
@c @itemize @bullet
@c @item
@c @cindex compiler
@c @cindex linker
@c   Of primary interest is the @code{ellcc} program.  This program is
@c created during compile time, and is intended to abstract compiler
@c specific characteristics from the developer.  This program is called to
@c compile and link all objects that will make up the final shared object,
@c and accepts all common C compiler flags.  @code{ellcc} also sets up the
@c correct environment for compiling modules by enabling any special
@c compiler modes (such as PIC mode), setting the correct include paths for
@c the location of @value{emacs} internal header files etc.  The program will also
@c invoke the linker correctly to created the final shared object which is
@c loaded into @value{emacs}.
@c
@c @item
@c @cindex header files
@c   CEmacs also makes all of the relevant @value{emacs} internal header files
@c available for module authors to use.  This is often required to get data
@c structure definitions and external variable declarations.  The header
@c files installed include the module specific header file
@c @file{emodules.h}.  Due to the nature of dynamic modules, most of the
@c internals of @value{emacs} are exposed.
@c @xref{Top,,,internals,@value{emacs} Internals Manual}, for a
@c more complete discussion on how to extend and understand @value{emacs}.  All of
@c the rules for C modules are discussed there.
@c
@c @item
@c @cindex samples
@c   Part of the @value{emacs} distribution is a set of sample modules.  These are
@c not installed when @value{emacs} is, but remain in the @value{emacs} source tree.
@c These modules live in the directory @file{modules}, which is a
@c sub-directory of the main @value{emacs} source code directory.  Please look at
@c the samples carefully, and maybe even use them as a basis for making
@c your own modules.  Most of the concepts required for writing extension
@c modules are covered in the samples.
@c
@c @item
@c @cindex documentation
@c @cindex help
@c   Last, but not least is this manual.  This can be viewed from within
@c @value{emacs}, and it can be printed out as well.  It is the intention of this
@c document that it will describe everything you need to know about
@c extending @value{emacs} in C.  If you do not find this to be the case, please
@c contact the author(s).
@c @end itemize

  The rest of this document will discuss the actual mechanics of
SXEmacs emodules and work through several of the samples.  Please be
sure that you have read the SXEmacs Internals Manual and understand
everything in it.  The concepts there apply to all emodules.  This
document may have some overlap, but it is the internals manual which
should be considered the final authority.  It will also help a great
deal to look at the actual SXEmacs source code to see how things are
done.


@node Anatomy of a Emodule
@chapter Anatomy of a Emodule
@cindex anatomy
@cindex module skeleton
@cindex skeleton, module
@cindex module format
@cindex format, module

  A dynamically loadable SXEmacs extension (hereafter referred to as a
emodule) can carry certain special pieces of information and functions
which are then used in a predefined special way.  This chapter
describes the basic layout of such a emodule, and provides a very
simple sample.

@menu
* Special Header Files::        Better include <emodules-ng.h>
* Recognised Functions::        Specially treated functions
* Recognised Variables::        Specially treated variables
* Loading other Emodules::       Additional notes on dependent emodules
@end menu


@node Special Header Files
@section Special Header Files
@cindex headers
@cindex include files

@cindex emodules-ng.h
@cindex config.h
@cindex sxemacs.h
  Every emodule better includes the file @file{emodules-ng.h}.  This
will primarily set up certain vital macros.  If you want to stay close
to the rest of the SXEmacs binary, for example provide lisp bindings
of your stuff or implement functionality depending on whether or not
SXEmacs was configured with a certain feature, you should have a
thorough glance at @file{sxemacs.h}.

  Most emodules will probably require some pre-processor conditionals
based on constants defined in @file{config.h} which is included
automatically upon inclusion of @file{sxemacs.h}.  This file is
automatically generated during the configure phase of SXEmacs, its
prototype is @file{config.h.in} which in turn is autogenerated from
various macros in the @file{m4/} directory and @file{configure.ac}.

  Depending on what your emodule will be doing at last, you will
probably need to include other header files as well.

@c @c Bullshit
@c @table @file
@c @item lisp.h
@c
@c @item sysdep.h
@c
@c @item window.h
@c
@c @item buffer.h
@c
@c @item insdel.h
@c
@c @item frame.h
@c @end table


@node Recognised Functions
@section Recognised Functions
@cindex functions, specially treated
@cindex recognised functions

A typical emodule will implement a fancy feature (or hopefully many
thereof) and thence be willing to provide a lisp binding in the
surface, e.g. a function, or anything similar to make use of the
feature.  Sounds simple, is simple: SXEmacs just asks its inbuilt
crystal ball to determine which of your functions was meant to appear
in the lisp engine.

  Albeit tempting with respect to simplicity and comfort this
behaviour is technically an effort to realise.  SXEmacs therefore
treats some symbols of your emodule in a special way.

@defun init
Code which is run after opening the emodule and all its requisite
modules.

Usually this carries all the bindings you want to export to the lisp
surface, such as macros, functions, variables and (lisp) symbols.
Moreover, depending on your code this can be used to initialise
private setups, such as private tables or memory blocks.
@end defun

@defun reinit
Code which is run upon a reload of the emodule.

Normally this is just a @code{deinit();} call followed by another
@code{init();} call.  The reason to have a special entry point for
reinitialisation is that, roughly, @code{reinit()} is not exactly just
a @code{deinit(); init();} sequence.  For instance you might want to
avoid to initialise certain private memory blocks again because their
setup was a very expensive operation.
@end defun

@defun deinit
Code which is run after closing all of a emodule's requisites upon a
@code{unload-module} request.

Usually you would unleash all your privately held resources and unbind
any exported variables, functions, macros, and so forth.
@end defun

@defun docs
A special function called to incorporate documentation strings for
your lisp bindings.

Normally this entry point is generated automatically using the
@file{make-docfile} utility.
@end defun

All these function are truly optional.  Their signature is actually
@example
@code{void(*)(emodng_t)}
@end example
but you can also make them
@example
@code{void(*)(void)}
@end example

  Quick notes re emodule unloading.  It seems quite natural to be
able to unload stuff, at least in the perfect world.  While this is
still true if your emodule provides truly complementary functionality
(whatever that is) it becomes a critical issue once you truly
intervene or even replace internal functionality.  We are @emph{NOT}
barring you from unloading your emodule nor are we saying you should
avoid that feature but you should be aware of its dramatical
consequences when done sloppily.

  The best comparison we can come up with is the concept of emodules
for the linux kernel.  Imagine you were a emodule providing ultra fast
access to, say, scsi drives and therefore had to oust the kernel's
normal handlers for those drives.  Now after unloading your emodule you
would reestablish the old, superseded handlers, would you not?  As
mentioned before, today's system are usually not equipped with a
superior intelligence being able to completely understand your concept
and your mode of operation in order to automatically withdraw, or
simply revert, your actions just by looking at the emodule's code.

@noindent
Ergo @emph{YOU} are responsible to restore the state of the system!

  It does not necessarily mean that you have to unwind completely to
the exact state before you entered the scene, no, you are `only'
encouraged to leave a working system behind, whatever that means in
the context of your emodule.

@itemize
@item
Carefully consider if you want to unbind exported lisp variables.

If they are not filled with special lisp objects only your emodule
knows about it is definitely wise to leave them in the environment.

@item
Carefully consider if you want to unbind exported macros.

After all a macro is just a piece of code which produces another piece
of code under the influence of some variables passed to it, so why not
simply keep that?

@item
Carefully consider if you want to unbind exported functions.

This is a bit more delicate.  The lisp language does not distinguish
between code and data and your function could have ended up literally
anywhere.  Simply unbinding your functions, using @code{UNDEFSUBR} or
@code{Ffmakunbound}, will possibly turn any reference to them into an
error generator.  This is especially annoying when your emodule's
functions were used in so frequented hooks like @code{pre-gc-hook}.

Solution: Do not unbind your functions.  Instead rebind them to
something which has the same input signature but, for instance,
produces an unmistakable message.  Be prolific!

@item
Any other scenario not covered here is basically either a real
auxiliary, read optionally, thing where unloading does not harm at
all, or it really affects the guts of SXEmacs in which case we take it
for granted that you know what you are doing anyway.
@end itemize


@node Recognised Variables
@section Recognised Variables
@cindex variables, specially treated
@cindex recognised variables

Basically there is only one specially-treated variable.

@defvar dependencies
A @code{const char *} array which lists the names of all requisite
modules and is terminated with a @code{NULL} entry.  These are opened
and initialised before the actual emodule is initialised.
@end defvar

  Like the specially-treated functions above, this variable is also
optional.  Moreover, the same naming policies apply, and most
importantly there is a convenience macro which hides the raw C work
you had to do.

@deffn macro REQUIRE name &rest names
Proclaim the requisite emodules of @var{name}.  Set up and fill the
@code{dependencies} variable from @var{names} as discussed above.
@end deffn


@node Loading other Emodules
@section Loading other Emodules
@cindex dependencies

Sometimes it is necessary to use functions, or generally symbols,
defined in a foreign emodule you depend on.  In general it is
impossible to open (as in @code{dlopen()}) your emodule to extract the
@code{dependencies} variable when you refer to one of these external
symbols in your code.  The corresponding error message goes along the
lines of
@example
@code{Cannot open modules foo: Undefined symbol bar.}
@end example

@noindent
So what happened?

  The emodule itself can contain dynamic references to other libraries,
or, most likely, symbols from the SXEmacs binary.  However, they have
to be resolvable, and in fact are tried to be resolved, when opening a
module.  Now if you refer to symbols defined in another emodule
@footnote{This was not possible with the old emodule system} you, the
user, have to load that other emodule before.

@noindent
So what's the rant about that @var{dependencies} thingiedingie?

  As mentioned above the new @code{load-module} function will exactly
relieve you, the user, of this task provided the emodule proclaimed
the list of its dependencies.  Now this seems to be a charade, in
order to open the emodule to read its dependencies you, the user, have
to load all of its dependencies because naively opening the emodule
will yield nothing but the error above when foreign symbols are used.

  The solution is to provide a, sort of, low-quality draught version
of the foreign functions you, the emodule author, refer to.  The
missing link here are the so-called @dfn{weak symbols}.  They
usually do not carry any real information (variable) or functionality
(function) and are meant to be overwritten by the ``real'' symbol as
soon as possible.  When properly coded their life-time spans just
about the time from opening the emodule to opening the requisite
module which, hopefully, defines real symbol and thence replaces the
weak one.

@noindent
Imagine @samp{module-A} is doing all the hard work and provides the
function
@example
/* inside module-A.c */
bool solve_complex_problem(void)
@{
        @dots{}
        return true;
@}
@end example

@noindent
Now @samp{module-B} contains a function @code{void
compute_lotto_numbers(void)} which goes:
@example
@group
/* inside module-B.c */
void compute_lotto_numbers(void)
@{
        if (solve_complex_problem()) @{
                /* lotto numbers found, hooray! print them */
                @dots{}
        @}
        @dots{}
@}
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Leaving it like that will effectively bar your users from computing
the lotto numbers and I personally would hate you, the emodule
developer, for the rest of my life.  However, to finish this example
using weak symbols you would additionally put into @file{module-B.c}:

@example
@group
bool solve_complex_problem(void) __attribute__((weak));

bool solve_complex_problem(void)
@{
        return false;
@}
@end group
@end example

Some practical hints:
@itemize
@item
If you have included @file{sxemacs.h} already you can use its
@code{WEAK} and @code{WEAK_EXTERN} macros to hide the compiler
specific attribute declaration.
@item
This magic spell can also be applied to C variables.
@item
Do not simply make your weak version of a function a no-op, rather
make it notify your users or yourself that the weak version is still
in effect.  This can save you a lot of trouble when things go wrong
and the weak version is stronger than you thought or never
overridden or the like.
@end itemize


@node Building your Emodule
@chapter Building your Emodule
@cindex module building

In contrast to former emodule concepts, the current <wordhere> is much
more flexible in all respects.  This is a drama however since there is
no @emph{THE} way to do it and hence this section is only a showcase.
Nonetheless, we try to give a few more examples, clues even, in the
@ref{More Ideas} section below, obviously in the hope that they turn
out to be useful.

@menu
* Configuring::                 How to
* Compiling and linking::       How to
* More Ideas::                  Other things you might want
@end menu

@node Configuring
@section Configuring your emodule

This step really depends on the purpose of your emodule.  So we cut it
really short here.  Consider this passage an assortment of useful
tips.

@itemize
@item
SXEmacs by default installs its configuration file @file{config.h} in
its header directory, @file{$prefix/include/sxemacs/@var{version}/} by
default, so you can conditionalise on whatever has been configured by
the user.
@item
SXEmacs installs all its configure tests (written in m4) into
aclocal's macro directory, @file{$prefix/share/aclocal/} by default,
so you can basically repeat every single test which facilitates the
scenario where your emodule is configured differently than SXEmacs.
@end itemize

@node Compiling and linking
@section Compiling and linking your emodule

Basically using autotools and libtool your emodule is compiled with
almost a one liner:
@example
@cartouche
module_LTLIBRARIES = my-module
my_module_SOURCES = source1.c source2.c @dots{}
my_module_LDFLAGS = -module
@end cartouche
@file{Makefile.am} assuming @var{moduledir} is properly defined.
@end example

It becomes a wee bit more complex than that if you define lisp
bindings for which documentation strings are supposed to be exported.

@example
@cartouche
module_LTLIBRARIES = my-module.la
my_module_la_SOURCES = source1.c source2.c @dots{}
nodist_my_module_la_SOURCES = source.doc.c
my_module_la_LDFLAGS = -module
BUILT_SOURCES = source.doc.c

SUFFIXES = .doc.c
source.doc.c: $(my_module_la_SOURCES)
	$(make_docfile) --modname $* -E $@ $^
@end cartouche
@file{Makefile.am} for emodule @samp{my-module} with built
documentation strings
@end example

Note: In both examples we assume that you defined a (make) variable
moduledir.  The final emodule will be installed there.  In the second
example we also assume that the variable @var{make_docfile} points to
the @file{make-docfile} utility.


@node More Ideas
@section More Ideas

The sole purpose of the above examples is to show off.  Making
emodules has become as easy as making children, but basically you are
not restricted to the above way.  Hence an assortment of useful clues:

@itemize
@item
The basic manual compilation command for C sources goes along the
lines of:
@example
gcc -g -O2 -shared -o my-module.so.0 my-source.c
@end example

@item
For fortran:
@example
f77 -g -O2 -shared -o my-module.so.0 my-source.f
@end example

@item
Emodules themselves can be linked to a whole world of shared libraries,
they are automatically loaded.  Linking emodules to other emodules is
possible on some platforms but in general not portable.

@item
The @file{make-docfile} utility can always be very easily found when
you know the location of an installed SXEmacs binary.  Instead of
calling @file{make-docfile} directly you would call
@code{sxemacs --make-docfile} and pass all arguments you would
normally pass thereafter.

The target of the example in the previous section then reads:
@example
make_docfile = sxemacs --make-docfile

SUFFIXES = .doc.c
source.doc.c: $(my_module_la_SOURCES)
	$(make_docfile) --modname $* -E $@ $^
@end example

@item
Basically the suffix @file{.doc.c} is not compulsory.  In fact, you
can choose whatever you like there.  In our eyes this is yet
convenient since the created file is indeed a C file and hence there
will be no trouble for any @samp{.c.o} rules you might have to cope
with the compilation.

On the other hand, having its suffix be @file{.doc.c} facilitates the
use of a pattern-based rule in your Makefile when your emodule consists
of many single source files which otherwise means that you had to
create a @samp{@var{file}.doc.c} rule for each file.

We ourselves use the following pattern-based rule:
@example
make_docfile = $(SXEMACS) --make-docfile

SUFFIXES = .doc.c
.c.doc.c:
	$(make_docfile) --modname $* -E $@ $<
@end example
where the @var{SXEMACS} variable points to the just built
@file{sxemacs} binary.

For all make-agnostics the above rule means that given a C file
@file{foo.c} the rule to create a file @file{foo.doc.c} with the
documentation strings in it goes:
@example
$(SXEMACS) --make-docfile --modname foo -E foo.doc.c foo.c
@end example
when the command is maximally expanded.

@item
The @file{make-docfile} utility itself does not (yet) come with a
sensible @samp{--help} output.  Here in short the explanation you may
long for:
@example
make-docfile [--modname <name>] -E <outfile> <infile> [<infile> @dots{}]
@end example
@end itemize


@c @c for our museum
@c @node Compile Mode, Initialization Mode, Using ellcc, Using ellcc
@c @section Compile Mode
@c @cindex compiling
@c
@c By default, @code{ellcc} is in @dfn{compile} mode.  This means that it
@c assumes that all of the command line arguments are C compiler arguments,
@c and that you want to compile the specified source file or files.  You
@c can force compile mode by specifying the @code{--mode=compile} argument
@c to @code{ellcc}.
@c
@c In this mode, @code{ellcc} is simply a front-end to the same C compiler
@c that was used to create the @value{emacs} binary itself.  All @code{ellcc}
@c does in this mode is insert a few extra command line arguments before
@c the arguments you specify to @code{ellcc} itself.  @code{ellcc} will
@c then invoke the C compiler to compile your module, and will return the
@c same exit codes and messages that your C compiler does.
@c
@c By far the easiest way to compile modules is to construct a
@c @file{Makefile} as you would for a normal program, and simply insert, at
@c some appropriate place something similar to:
@c
@c @example
@c @cartouche
@c CC=ellcc --mode=compile
@c
@c .c.o:
@c     $(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $<
@c @end cartouche
@c @end example
@c
@c After this, all you need to do is provide simple @code{make} rules for
@c compiling your module source files.  Since modules are most useful when
@c they are small and self-contained, most modules will have a single
@c source file, aside from the module specific initialization file (see
@c below for details).
@c
@c @node Initialization Mode, Link Mode, Compile Mode, Using ellcc
@c @section Initialization Mode
@c @cindex initialization
@c @cindex documentation
@c
@c @value{emacs} uses a rather bizarre way of documenting variables and
@c functions.  Rather than have the documentation for compiled functions
@c and variables passed as static strings in the source code, the
@c documentation is included as a C comment.  A special program, called
@c @file{make-docfile}, is used to scan the source code files and extract
@c the documentation from these comments, producing the @value{emacs} @file{DOC}
@c file, which the internal help engine scans when the documentation for a
@c function or variable is requested.
@c
@c Due to the internal construction of Lisp objects, subrs and other such
@c things, adding documentation for a compiled function or variable in a
@c compiled module, at any time after @value{emacs} has been @dfn{dumped} is
@c somewhat problematic.  Fortunately, as a module writer you are insulated
@c from the difficulties thanks to your friend @code{ellcc} and some
@c internal trickery in the module loading code.  This is all done using
@c the @dfn{initialization} mode of @code{ellcc}.
@c
@c The result of running @code{ellcc} in initialization mode is a C source
@c file which you compile with (you guessed it) @code{ellcc} in compile
@c mode.  Initialization mode is where you set the module name, version,
@c title and gather together all of the documentation strings for the
@c functions and variables in your module.  There are several options that
@c you are required to pass @code{ellcc} in initialization mode, the first
@c of which is the mode switch itself, @code{--mode=init}.
@c
@c Next, you need to specify the name of the C source code file that
@c @code{ellcc} will produce, and you specify this using the
@c @code{--mod-output=FILENAME} argument.  @var{FILENAME} is the name of
@c the C source code file that will contain the module variables and
@c @code{docs_of_module} function.
@c
@c As discussed previously, each module requires a short @dfn{handle} or
@c module name.  This is specified with the @code{--mod-name=NAME} option,
@c where @var{NAME} is the abbreviated module name.  This @var{NAME} must
@c consist only of characters that are valid in C function and variable
@c names.
@c
@c The module version is specified using @code{--mod-version=VERSION}
@c argument, with @var{VERSION} being any arbitrary version string.  This
@c version can be passed as an optional second argument to the Lisp
@c function @code{load-module}, and as the third argument to the internal
@c module loading command @code{emodules_load}.  This version string is
@c used to distinguish between different versions of the same module, and
@c to ensure that the module is loaded at a specific version.
@c
@c Last, but not least, is the module title.  Specified using the
@c @code{--mod-title=TITLE} option, the specified @var{TITLE} is used when
@c the list of loaded modules is displayed.  The module title serves no
@c purpose other than to inform the user of the function of the module.
@c This string should be brief, as it has to be formatted to fit the
@c screen.
@c
@c Following all of these parameters, you need to provide the list of all
@c source code modules that make up your module.  These are the files which
@c are scanned by @file{make-docfile}, and provide the information required
@c to populate the @code{docs_of_module} function.  Below is a sample
@c @file{Makefile} fragment which indicates how all of this is used.
@c
@c @example
@c @cartouche
@c CC=ellcc --mode=compile
@c LD=ellcc --mode=link
@c MODINIT=ellcc --mode=init
@c CFLAGS=-O2 -DSOME_STUFF
@c
@c .c.o:
@c     $(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $<
@c
@c MODNAME=sample
@c MODVER=1.0.0
@c MODTITLE="Small sample module"
@c
@c SRCS=modfile1.c modfile2.c modfile3.c
@c OBJS=$(SRCS:.c=.o)
@c
@c all: sample.ell
@c clean:
@c     rm -f $(OBJS) sample_init.o sample.ell
@c
@c install: all
@c     mkdir `ellcc --mod-location`/mymods > /dev/null
@c     cp sample.ell `ellcc --mod-location`/mymods/sample.ell
@c
@c sample.ell: $(OBJS) sample_init.o
@c     $(LD) --mod-output=$@ $(OBJS) sample_init.o
@c
@c sample_init.o: sample_init.c
@c sample_init.c: $(SRCS)
@c     $(MODINIT) --mod-name=$(MODNAME) --mod-version=$(MODVER) \
@c     --mod-title=$(MODTITLE) --mod-output=$@ $(SRCS)
@c @end cartouche
@c @end example
@c
@c The above @file{Makefile} is, in fact, complete, and would compile the
@c sample module, and optionally install it.  The @code{--mod-location}
@c argument to @code{ellcc} will produce, on the standard output, the base
@c location of the @value{emacs} module directory.  Each sub-directory of that
@c directory is automatically searched for modules when they are loaded with
@c @code{load-module}.  An alternative location would be
@c @file{/usr/local/lib/sxemacs/site-modules}.  That path can change depending
@c on the options the person who compiled @value{emacs} chose, so you can
@c always determine the correct site location using the
@c @code{--mod-site-location} option.  This directory is treated the same way
@c as the main module directory.  Each sub-directory within it is searched for
@c a given module when the user attempts to load it.  The valid extensions that
@c the loader attempts to use are @file{.so}, @file{.ell} and @file{.dll}.  You
@c can use any of these extensions, although @file{.ell} is the preferred
@c extension.
@c
@c @node Link Mode, Other ellcc options, Initialization Mode, Using ellcc
@c @section Link Mode
@c @cindex linking
@c
@c Once all of your source code files have been compiled (including the
@c generated init file) you need to link them all together to create the
@c loadable module.  To do this, you invoke @code{ellcc} in link mode, by
@c passing the @code{--mode=link} option.  You need to specify the final
@c output file using the @code{--mod-output=NAME} option, but other than
@c that all other arguments are passed on directly to the system compiler
@c or linker, along with any other required arguments to create the
@c loadable module.
@c
@c The module has complete access to all symbols that were present in the
@c dumped @value{emacs}, so you do not need to link against libraries that were
@c linked in with the main executable.  If your library uses some other
@c extra libraries, you will need to link with those.  There is nothing
@c particularly complicated about link mode.  All you need to do is make
@c sure you invoke it correctly in the @file{Makefile}.  See the sample
@c @file{Makefile} above for an example of a well constructed
@c @file{Makefile} that invoked the linker correctly.
@c
@c @node Other ellcc options, Environment Variables, Link Mode, Using ellcc
@c @section Other @code{ellcc} options
@c @cindex paths
@c
@c Aside from the three main @code{ellcc} modes described above,
@c @code{ellcc} can accept several other options.  These are typically used
@c in a @file{Makefile} to determine installation paths.  @code{ellcc} also
@c allows you to over-ride several of its built-in compiler and linker
@c options using environment variables.  Here is the complete list of
@c options that @code{ellcc} accepts.
@c
@c @table @code
@c @item --mode=compile
@c Enables compilation mode.  Use this to compile source modules.
@c
@c @item --mode=link
@c Enabled link edit mode.  Use this to create the final module.
@c
@c @item --mode=init
@c Used to create the documentation function and to initialize other
@c required variables.  Produces a C source file that must be compiled with
@c @code{ellcc} in compile mode before linking the final module.
@c
@c @item --mode=verbose
@c Enables verbose mode.  This will show you the commands that are being
@c executed, as well as the version number of @code{ellcc}.  If you specify
@c this option twice, then some extra debugging information is displayed.
@c
@c @item --mod-name=NAME
@c Sets the short internal module @var{NAME} to the string specified,
@c which must consist only of valid C identifiers.  Required during
@c initialization mode.
@c
@c @item --mod-version=VERSION
@c Sets the internal module @var{VERSION} to the specified string.
@c Required during initialization mode.
@c
@c @item --mod-title=TITLE
@c Sets the module descriptive @var{TITLE} to the string specified.  This
@c string can contain any printable characters, but should not be too
@c long.  It is required during initialization mode.
@c
@c @item --mod-output=FILENAME
@c Used to control the output file name.  This is used during
@c initialization mode to set the name of the C source file that will be
@c created to @var{FILENAME}.  During link mode, it sets the name of the
@c final loadable module to @var{FILENAME}.
@c
@c @item --mod-location
@c This will print the name of the standard module installation path on the
@c standard output and immediately exit @code{ellcc}.  Use this option to
@c determine the directory prefix of where you should install your modules.
@c
@c @item --mod-site-location
@c This will print the name of the site specific module location and exit.
@c
@c @item --mod-archdir
@c Prints the name of the root of the architecture-dependent directory that
@c @value{emacs} searches for architecture-dependent files.
@c
@c @item --mod-config
@c Prints the name of the configuration for which @value{emacs} and @code{ellcc}
@c were compiled.
@c @end table
@c
@c @node Environment Variables,  , Other ellcc options, Using ellcc
@c @section Environment Variables
@c @cindex environment variables
@c
@c During its normal operation, @code{ellcc} uses the compiler and linker
@c flags that were determined at the time @value{emacs} was configured.  In
@c certain rare circumstances you may wish to over-ride the flags passed to
@c the compiler or linker, and you can do so using environment variables.
@c The table below lists all of the environment variables that @code{ellcc}
@c recognizes.
@c
@c @table @code
@c @item ELLCC
@c @cindex @code{ELLCC}
@c This is used to over-ride the name of the C compiler that is invoked by
@c @code{ellcc}.
@c
@c @item ELLLD
@c @cindex @code{ELLLD}
@c Sets the name of the link editor to use to created the final module.
@c
@c @item ELLCFLAGS
@c @cindex @code{ELLCFLAGS}
@c Sets the compiler flags passed on when compiling source modules.  This
@c only sets the basic C compiler flags.  There are certain hard-coded
@c flags that will always be passed.
@c
@c @item ELLLDFLAGS
@c @cindex @code{ELLLDFLAGS}
@c Sets the flags passed on to the linker.  This does @strong{not} include
@c the flags for enabling PIC mode.  This just sets basic linker flags.
@c
@c @item ELLDLLFLAGS
@c @cindex @code{ELLDLLFLAGS}
@c Sets the flags passed to the linker that are required to created shared
@c and loadable objects.
@c
@c @item ELLPICFLAGS
@c @cindex @code{ELLPICFLAGS}
@c Sets the C compiler option required to produce an object file that is
@c suitable for including in a shared library.  This option should turn on
@c PIC mode, or the moral equivalent thereof on the target system.
@c
@c @item ELLMAKEDOC
@c @cindex @code{ELLMAKEDOC}
@c Sets the name of the @file{make-docfile} program to use.  Usually
@c @code{ellcc} will use the version that was compiled and installed with
@c @value{emacs}, but this option allows you to specify an alternative path.
@c Used during the compile phase of @value{emacs} itself.
@c @end table


@node Defining Functions
@chapter Defining Functions
@cindex defining functions

  One of the main reasons you would ever write a emodule is to
provide one or more @dfn{functions} for the user or the editor to use.
The term @dfn{function} is a bit overloaded here, as it refers to both
a C function and the way it appears to Lisp, which is a
@dfn{subroutine}, or simply a @dfn{subr}.

  A Lisp subr is also known as a Lisp primitive, but that term applies
less to dynamic emodules.  @xref{Writing Lisp
Primitives,,,internals,SXEmacs Internals Manual}, for details on
how to declare functions.

  Normal Lisp primitives document the functions they define by
including the documentation as a C comment.  During the build process,
a program called @file{make-docfile} is run, which will extract all of
these comments, build up a single large documentation file, and will
store pointers to the start of each documentation entry in the dumped
SXEmacs.

@menu
* Using DEFUN::                 Using the DEFUN macro to define functions
* Declaring Functions::         Declaring functions to the Lisp reader
@end menu


@node Using DEFUN
@section Using @code{DEFUN}
@cindex subrs
@findex DEFUN
@cindex functions, Lisp
@cindex functions, defining

  Although the full syntax of a function declaration is discussed in the
SXEmacs internals manual in greater depth, what follows is a brief
description of how to define and implement a new Lisp primitive in a
module.  This is done using the @code{DEFUN} macro.  Here is a small
example:

@example
@cartouche
DEFUN("my-function", Fmy_function, 1, 1, "FFile name: ", /*
Sample Emacs primitive function.

The specified FILE is frobnicated before it is fnozzled.
*/
    (file))
@{
        char *filename;

        if (NILP(file))
                return Qnil;

        filename = (char *)XSTRING_DATA(file);
        frob(filename);
        return Qt;
@}
@end cartouche
@end example

The first argument is the name of the function as it will appear to the
Lisp reader.  This must be provided as a string.  The second argument is
the name of the actual C function that will be created.  This is
typically the Lisp function name with a preceding capital @code{F}, with
hyphens converted to underscores.  This must be a valid C function
name.  Next come the minimum and maximum number of arguments,
respectively.  This is used to ensure that the correct number of
arguments are passed to the function.  Next is the @code{interactive}
definition.  If this function is meant to be run by a user
interactively, then you need to specify the argument types and prompts
in this string.  Please consult the SXEmacs Lisp manual for more
details.  Next comes a C comment that is the documentation for this
function.  Last comes the list of function argument names, if any.

@node Declaring Functions
@section Declaring Functions
@findex DEFSUBR
@cindex functions, declaring

Simply writing the code for a function is not enough to make it
available to the Lisp reader.  You should use the specially treated
@code{init} function in your emodule to let the lisp reader know about
all the great subroutines you have coded, @xref{Recognised Functions}.

  This is done by calling @code{DEFSUBR} with the name of the
function (its C name, ya know?) as its only argument.  Using the
example function above, your body of the @code{init} function would
look like:

@example
@cartouche
void init(void)
@{
        DEFSUBR(Fmy_function);
@}
@end cartouche
@end example

This call will instruct SXEmacs to make the function visible to the
Lisp reader and will prepare for the insertion of the documentation
into the right place.  Once this is done, the user can call the Lisp
function @code{my-function}.

Basically, that is all you need to define and proclaim new functional
lisp bindings.  The rules for what goes inside the functions, and how
to write good emodules, is beyond the scope of this document.  Please
consult the SXEmacs internals manual for more details.


@node Defining Variables
@chapter Defining Variables
@cindex defining variables
@cindex defining objects
@findex DEFVAR_LISP
@findex DEFVAR_BOOL
@findex DEFVAR_INT
@cindex variables, Lisp
@cindex variables, defining
@cindex objects, defining
@cindex objects, Lisp

  Rarely will you write a emodule that only contains functions.  It is
common to also provide variables which can be used to control the
behaviour of functions or store a certain state or simply the results
of a function being executed.  The actual C variable types are the
same for emodules and internal SXEmacs primitives, and the declaration
of the variables is identical.

  @xref{Adding Global Lisp Variables,,,internals,SXEmacs Internals Manual},
for more information on variables and naming conventions.

  Once your variables are defined and initialised properly, you need
to make the Lisp reader aware of them.  This is done in the specially
treated @code{init} function of your emodule using special SXEmacs
macros such as @code{DEFVAR_LISP}, @code{DEFVAR_BOOL}, @code{DEFVAR_INT}
etc.  The best way to see how to use these macros is to look at existing
source code, or read the internals manual.

  Below is a small example which declares and properly proclaims two
variables.  You will note that this code takes into account the fact
that this emodule may very well be compiled into SXEmacs itself.  This
is a prudent thing to do.

@example
@cartouche
Lisp_Object Vsample_string;
int sample_boolean;

void init(void)
@{
        DEFVAR_LISP("sample-string", &Vsample_string /*
This is a sample string, declared in a module.

Nothing magical about it.
*/);

        DEFVAR_BOOL("sample-boolean", &sample_boolean /*
*Sample user-settable boolean.
*/);

        sample_boolean = 0;
        Vsample_string = build_string("My string");
@}
@end cartouche
@end example

@node Finding & Loading Emodules
@chapter Finding & Loading Emodules
@cindex module load path
@cindex module-load-path
@cindex load-path
@cindex finding emodules
@cindex module loading
@cindex emodule loading
@cindex loading modules
@cindex loading emodules
@cindex search path

Loading a SXEmacs Emodules is usually simply a matter of@dots{}
@smallexample
@code{(require 'emodname)}
@end smallexample
Emodules can also be loaded interactively with@dots{}
@smallexample
@code{M-x load-module}
@end smallexample
@dfn{#'load-module} supports completion, making it a bit easier for
the user.

The default search path for Emodules (also known as
@dfn{module-load-path}) is@dots{}

@smallexample
@file{~/.sxemacs/$machinetriplet/modules}
@file{$prefix/lib/sxemacs/$machinetriplet/site-modules}
@file{$prefix/lib/sxemacs-$version/$machinetriplet/modules}
@end smallexample

Searching recurses down one level below these directories.  The
@dfn{module-load-path} is also part of the standard @dfn{load-path}.
This means that if an emodule shares the same feature symbol name as a
elisp library in the @dfn{load-path}, that one that is loaded from a
@dfn{#'require} call will be the one that is higher up in the
@dfn{load-path}.

It is possible to set the @dfn{module-load-path} at SXEmacs configure
time using the @option{--with-module-path=PATH} configure option.  But
you normally would @emph{not} need to do this, as SXEmacs' build chain
is smart enough to set sane defaults.

Locating where a particular emodule is installed on disc can be done
with the function, @dfn{#'locate-module}.

To see which emodules are loaded in the current SXEmacs session, use
@dfn{#'list-modules}.  It returns a list of emodule names (strings),
or if called interactively, it displays the list of emodules in the
echo area.  The names are the emodules' @emph{internal}.
@smallexample
@lisp
(list-modules)
    @result{} ("cl" "cl-loop" "ase" "ase_set")
@end lisp
@end smallexample


@c Print the tables of contents
@contents
@c That's all


@node Index
@chapter Index

@printindex cp

@bye
