\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename sppm.info
@settitle SXEmacs Policies & Procedures Manual
@finalout
@setchapternewpage on
@c %**end of header

@c Define a macro or 2 (abbrevs)
@macro sy
Steve Youngs
@end macro

<<<<<<< HEAD
@macro syc
<<<<<<< HEAD
Copyright @copyright{} 2004 - 2009 @sy{}
=======
Copyright @copyright{} 2004 - 2010 @sy{}
>>>>>>> origin/master
=======
@macro s
Steve
@end macro

@macro syc
Copyright @copyright{} 2004 - 2011 @sy{}
>>>>>>> master
@end macro

@macro sye
@email{steve@@sxemacs.org, @sy{}}
@end macro

<<<<<<< HEAD
@macro yy
<<<<<<< HEAD
2009
@end macro

@macro cver
22.1.11
@end macro

@macro pver
22.1.10
@end macro

@macro nver
22.1.12
=======
2010
@end macro

@macro cver
22.1.12
@end macro

@macro pver
22.1.11
@end macro

@macro nver
22.1.13
>>>>>>> origin/master
=======
@macro cver
22.1.14
@end macro

@macro nver
22.1.15
>>>>>>> master
@end macro


@set EDITION First
<<<<<<< HEAD
@set UPDATED August 19, 2007
=======
@set UPDATED March 14, 2011
>>>>>>> master

@c Things would be a lot easier if everything supported the `@copying'
@c command, I wouldn't have to put in these conditionals.  --SY.
@ifnottex
@copying
This is the SXEmacs Policies & Procedures Manual.
It was last updated @value{UPDATED}.

@syc{}.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence, Version 2.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end quotation

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore
@end copying
@end ifnottex

@dircategory SXEmacs Development
@direntry
* SPPM::                        SXEmacs Policies & Procedures Manual.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title SXEmacs Policies & Procedures Manual
@subtitle @value{EDITION} edition, last updated on @value{UPDATED}.
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@ifnottex
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex
@iftex
This is the SXEmacs Policies & Procedures Manual.
It was last updated @value{UPDATED}.

@syc{}.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence, Version 2.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end quotation

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore
@end iftex
@author by @sye{}
@end titlepage
@c Set up the headers and footers for the printed output (postscript).
@headings off
@everyheading @thischapter @|@| @thispage
@everyfooting @thistitle @|@| @syc{}

@contents

@node Top, Mission Statement, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This is the @value{EDITION} edition of the @cite{SXEmacs Policies & Procedures Manual}
@end ifinfo

@ifnottex
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

This document, as its name implies, is directed towards anyone who is
actively involved (or thinking of becoming actively involved) in the
development of @uref{http://www.sxemacs.org/, SXEmacs}.

@menu
* Mission Statement::           Why we do what we do
* Online Presence::             Where we make our first impressions
* Dispute Resolution::          Arguments can be resolved
* Coding Style::                Making sure your code looks like our code
* Patches::                     Handling contributed code/docs
* Feature Requests::            Dealing with feature requests
* Support Requests::            Handling support requests
* Bug Reports::                 Dealing with bug reports
* Making Releases::             Getting the finished product to the user
* New Features::                Getting new stuff into the code base
* Compatibility::               With XEmacs and GNU/Emacs
* Copyright and Licencing::     We won't accept just any old licence
* Developer Recruitment::       How to get new blood
* Making/Altering Policies::    Changing or updating this document
* Version Control::             How we keep track of the source
* Concept Index::               Concept Index
@end menu

@node Mission Statement, Online Presence, Top, Top
@chapter SXEmacs Mission Statement
@cindex mission statement
@cindex motivation
@cindex drive

Our mission is to@dots{}

@quotation
To provide the Open Source community with a text editing and development
environment that is based on XEmacs and is 2nd to none in regards to
stability, features, and innovation.

To foster a user and developer friendly project environment.

And, above all, to have fun doing it.
@end quotation

@node Online Presence, Dispute Resolution, Mission Statement, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter SXEmacs' Online Presence
@cindex http
@cindex www
@cindex web
@cindex online
@cindex ftp
@cindex sxemacs online
@cindex online, sxemacs

The SXEmacs project maintains a number of @dfn{online} services.
Including@dots{}

@itemize @bullet
@item
@uref{http://www.sxemacs.org/, The SXEmacs Web Site}
@item
@uref{http://downloads.sxemacs.org/, Release and Snapshot Tarballs}
@item
@uref{irc://irc.freenode.net/#sxemacs, The SXEmacs IRC channel}
@item
@uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, The SXEmacs Issue Tracker} @ref{Bug Reports}
@ref{Feature Requests} @ref{Support Requests}.
@item
@uref{http://store.sxemacs.org/, SXEmacs Merchandise}
@end itemize

@menu
* Web Site::                    Our shop front
* Download Site::               Where we keep the tarballs
* IRC::                         For those who like to talk about it
* Merchandise::                 Got the software@dots{} Get the T-Shirt
@end menu

@node Web Site, Download Site, Online Presence, Online Presence
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter SXEmacs Web Site
@cindex web
@cindex http
@cindex www.sxemacs.org

The SXEmacs web site content is kept under the same version control
system as SXEmacs itself @ref{Version Control}.  That means that
anyone can submit changes and updates to the site in the same manner
that they would for code submissions to SXEmacs @xref{Patches}.

There's really not much more to tell about the web site.  It is just
your normal run-of-the-mill web site.  And as everyone knows, HTML
blows goats so it doesn't get updated anywhere near as often as it
should.  We do have a @email{webmaster@@sxemacs.org, Webmaster}, so if
you do have any comments about the site, you should direct them there.
Or, alternatively, @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Devel}
mailing list.

@node Download Site, IRC, Web Site, Online Presence
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter SXEmacs Download Site
@cindex download
@cindex downloads
@cindex source code
@cindex source
@cindex tarball

@uref{http://downloads.sxemacs.org/releases/, SXEmacs release downloads} is
where you'll find release tarballs and release to release patches
available for download.

@uref{http://downloads.sxemacs.org/snapshots/, SXEmacs snapshot downloads} 
is where you can find snapshot tarballs which are uploaded from time
to time.  Please note that these snapshots can sometimes be very
unstable.

If you would like something made available for download at the SXEmacs
download site, contact @sye{}.

@node IRC, Merchandise, Download Site, Online Presence
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter SXEmacs on IRC
@cindex irc
@cindex talk
@cindex chat
@cindex support

Developers official communcation platform is the mailing list provided
at sxemacs.org. However, to discuss problems and assist users more
efficiently there is an official IRC channel.

SXEmacs IRC channel @dfn{#sxemacs} is located at freenode (formerly
known as OPN). Please use following URI to refer to it:

@uref{irc://irc.freenode.net/#sxemacs}

@subheading Various IRC HowTOs

@itemize @bullet
@item
Connecting to the network and joining the channel

Fire up your favourite irc client and use:
@code{/server irc.freenode.net} to connect to the network and
@code{/join #sxemacs} to join the community.
@item
HowTo become a respected regular

Okay, you've decided to be active on IRC and hopefully help other
users. You have joined the channel and idle around thirsting for hard
problems by helpless users.

In that case you will have to have a reliable (not-changing) nickname
that is linked to your person in order to refer to you.  This will help
us in blaming you if you misdirect users with your answers and even help
us to praise you if you convinced RMS to switch to SXEmacs ;)

Therefore, freenode provides a mechanism to eternalise yourself via
the nickname you carry. Use @code{/nickserv register <password>}
to engrave your nickname for your personal use.

This nickname is yours from now on. To identify yourself to freenode
use @code{/nickserv identify <samepasswordasabove>}

Your user mode will be changed to @dfn{+e} in case of successful
identification.

Whenever you see unscrupulous people carrying your nickname or your
nickname is ghosted because of a reconnection, you can just
@code{/nickserv ghost <yournickname> <yourpassword>} to send the 
other client to oblivion.

Okay, now that you've registered yourself with freenode, you're
nickname can be referred to, independently from whether you are
carrying that nick or not. Just do @code{/nickserv info <nickname>}
to obtain some information on a nickname you see and like to refer 
to.
@item
HowTo to be listed in the channel access list

There is no influence on this access list on the users and developer's
side.  It is merely up to the project lead who has control over it.
@item
Host cloaks

The only way to get one is to ask the project lead (JackaLX).
@item
No IRC client

You don't have an IRC client but still want to shoot the breeze with
us on IRC?  Then we have an answer for you@dots{}
@uref{http://www.sxemacs.org/irc.html, Chat from the web}.
@end itemize

@node Merchandise,, IRC, Online Presence
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter SXEmacs Merchandise
@cindex merchandise
@cindex shop
@cindex shopping
@cindex gift
@cindex money
@cindex t-shirt
@cindex retail therapy
@cindex donate
@cindex support
@cindex donation

At @uref{http://store.sxemacs.org/, The SXEmacs Store} you will find
for sale various cool and sexy goodies sporting the SXEmacs logo.  The
proceeds from all purchases go toward covering the costs involved in
the upkeep of the SXEmacs project.  Be the first on your street to own
a @i{I'm Too Sexy For My Emacs} T-shirt!

@node Dispute Resolution, Coding Style, Online Presence, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Dispute Resolution
@cindex dispute resolution
@cindex resolution, dispute
@cindex resolving disputes
@cindex disputes, resolving
@cindex argue
@cindex arguments

@quotation
When two people agree on everything, one of them isn't needed.
@end quotation

I can't remember where that quote comes from so if anyone reading this
knows, please let us know so we can give credit where credit is due.

We are all mature adults and most of the time we don't let our egos get
in the way of getting things done.  But human nature being what it is
means that from time to time we'll have conflict or disagreements.  In
the vast majority of these cases a resolution will come quickly and
easily through reasonable discussion.

This section is for those rare occasions that will be the exception to
the above.

In the event of a unresolvable dispute, the SXEmacs Project Lead,
@sye{}, will, at his discretion, take one or more of the following
steps@dots{}

@itemize
@item
Decide the outcome.
@item
Call a @dfn{vote} @ref{Voting}.
@item
Call a @dfn{postponement}.  This will mean that all parties will be
asked to stop discussing the matter until some date in the future.  This
future date will be given at the time the SXEmacs Project Lead calls the
postponement.  The idea here is to give everyone a chance to cool down
so that reasonable discussion can continue.
@end itemize

@menu
* Voting::                      Deciding things via ballot
@end menu

@node Voting,, Dispute Resolution, Dispute Resolution
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Voting
@cindex voting
@cindex vote
@cindex ballot

Sometimes things are best decided with a vote.  This section describes
how these votes are to be held.

Who may participate in a vote?  Anyone subscribed to the SXEmacs
Developers' mailing list, @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org}.

Who may call a vote?  The SXEmacs Project Lead, @sye{}.  Of course
anyone may ask the Project Lead to call a vote.

@subsection Mechanics of the Vote

@enumerate
@item
The votes will be cast via email on the SXEmacs Developers' mailing
list, @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org}.
@item
The @dfn{ballot paper} will have the email subject
@dfn{[Vote] Subject of vote}. The body of this email will contain the
details of the ballot.  The actual questions or points that make up what
is being voted on should be in a form that makes it easy to respond to.
In other words they should be either multiple choice or yes/no type
questions.
@item
Each person wishing to participate in the vote will simply reply
@emph{once} to this email.  The reply or @dfn{vote} @emph{must} come to
the mailing list.
@item
Anyone wishing to abstain need not do anything.  Just don't reply to the
ballot email.
@item
There will be a time limit restriction on voting on any matter.  This
time limit will be a minimum of one calendar week from the time the vote
is declared @dfn{open}.  The vote is declared @dfn{open} with the
posting of the initial ballot email (with the subject prefix of
@dfn{[Vote]}.
@end enumerate


@subsection Deciding the Outcome

As soon as practicable after the vote closes (when the time limit has
expired) the SXEmacs Project Lead will tally up all the votes and post
the results to the SXEmacs Developers' mailing list,
@email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org}.  This post will have the email
subject @dfn{[Vote Results] Subject of vote}.

For an issue to be decided via vote it must receive the majority of the
total number of votes with a minimum of four votes.

@smallexample
Issue decided:

  A - 5 votes
  B - 2 votes

A - wins
@end smallexample

@smallexample
Issue undecided:

  A - 3 votes
  B - 2 votes
@end smallexample


@node Coding Style, Patches, Dispute Resolution, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Coding Style
@cindex coding style
@cindex style, coding
@cindex style
@cindex coding

SXEmacs has two main programming languages, Emacs Lisp, and C, therefore
we need two sets of coding styles.

@subsection Coding Style -- Emacs Lisp
@cindex emacs lisp coding style
@cindex coding style, emacs lisp
@cindex lisp coding style
@cindex coding style, lisp

Read @pxref{(lispref)Style Tips}

Please take particular note of@dots{}

@quotation
Don't make a habit of putting close-parentheses on lines by
themselves; Lisp programmers find this disconcerting.  Once in a
while, when there is a sequence of many consecutive
close-parentheses, it may make sense to split them in one or two
significant places.
@end quotation

The only other thing I have to say about lisp coding style is to keep
your lines @emph{under} 80 columns in length.

@subsection Coding Style -- C
@cindex C coding style
@cindex coding style, C

@quotation
First off, I'd suggest printing out a copy of the GNU coding standards,
and NOT read it.  Burn them, it's a great symbolic gesture.

  -- Linus Torvalds
@end quotation

@menu
* General C Style::             What you should use everywhere
* SXEmacs Specific Style::      Our idiosyncrasies
@end menu

@node General C Style, SXEmacs Specific Style, Coding Style, Coding Style
@chapter General C Style
@cindex C coding style
@cindex coding style, C
@cindex general coding style
@cindex coding style, general

SXEmacs C code follows, to a large degree, the coding style of the Linux
Kernel source.  Much of this section is a verbatim copy of
@file{./Documentation/CodingStyle} from the Linux kernel sources.

@heading Indentation
@cindex indentation
@cindex indentation coding style
@cindex coding style, indentation

Tabs are 8 characters, and thus indentations are also 8 characters.
There are heretic movements that try to make indentations 4 (or even 2!)
characters deep, and that is akin to trying to define the value of PI to
be 3.

Rationale: The whole idea behind indentation is to clearly define where
a block of control starts and ends.  Especially when you've been looking
at your screen for 20 straight hours, you'll find it a lot easier to see
how the indentation works if you have large indentations.

Now, some people will claim that having 8-character indentations makes
the code move too far to the right, and makes it hard to read on a
80-character terminal screen.  The answer to that is that if you need
more than 3 levels of indentation, you're screwed anyway, and should
fix your program.

In short, 8-char indents make things easier to read, and have the added
benefit of warning you when you're nesting your functions too deep.
Heed that warning.

Don't put multiple statements on a single line unless you have something
to hide:

@smallexample
	if (condition) do_this;
	  do_something_everytime;
@end smallexample

Outside of comments and documentation, spaces are never used for
indentation, and the above example is deliberately broken.

@cindex coding style, whitespace
@cindex whitespace
Don't leave whitespace at the end of lines.  There is a
@file{whitespace.el} which you can get from
@uref{http://www.dsmit.com/lisp/}.  Use it.

@heading Breaking long lines and strings
@cindex long lines
Coding style is all about readability and maintainability using commonly
available tools.

The limit on the length of lines is 80 columns and this is a hard limit.

Statements longer than 80 columns will be broken into sensible chunks.
Descendants are always substantially shorter than the parent and are placed
substantially to the right. The same applies to function headers with a long
argument list. Long strings are as well broken into shorter strings.

@smallexample
void
fun(int a, int b, int c)
@{
	if (condition)
		printf("Warning this is a very very very long printf with "
						"3 parameters a: %u b: %u "
						"c: %u \n", a, b, c);
	else
		next_statement;
@}
@end smallexample

@heading Placing Braces
@cindex braces
@cindex coding style, braces
The other issue that always comes up in C styling is the placement of
braces.  Unlike the indent size, there are few technical reasons to
choose one placement strategy over the other, but the preferred way, as
shown to us by the prophets Kernighan and Ritchie, is to put the opening
brace last on the line, and put the closing brace first, thusly:

@smallexample
	if (x is true) @{
		we do y
	@}
@end smallexample

However, there is one special case, namely functions: they have the
opening brace at the beginning of the next line, thus:

@smallexample
	int function(int x)
	@{
		body of function
	@}
@end smallexample

Heretic people all over the world have claimed that this inconsistency
is ...  well ...  inconsistent, but all right-thinking people know that
(a) K&R are @emph{right} and (b) K&R are right.  Besides, functions are
special anyway (you can't nest them in C).

Note that the closing brace is empty on a line of its own, @emph{except}
in the cases where it is followed by a continuation of the same statement,
ie a "while" in a do-statement or an "else" in an if-statement, like this:

@smallexample
	do @{
		body of do-loop
	@} while (condition);
@end smallexample

and

@smallexample
	if (x == y) @{
		..
	@} else if (x > y) @{
		...
	@} else @{
		....
	@}
@end smallexample

@heading Naming
@cindex naming
@cindex coding style, naming
C is a Spartan language, and so should your naming be.  Unlike Modula-2
and Pascal programmers, C programmers do not use cute names like
@var{ThisVariableIsATemporaryCounter}.  A C programmer would call that
variable @var{tmp}, which is much easier to write, and not the least more
difficult to understand.

HOWEVER, while mixed-case names are frowned upon, descriptive names for
global variables are a must.  To call a global function "foo" is a
shooting offense.

GLOBAL variables (to be used only if you _really_ need them) need to
have descriptive names, as do global functions.  If you have a function
that counts the number of hidden buffers, you should call that
@code{count_hidden_buffers()} or similar, you should @emph{not} call it
@code{cntbuf()}.

Encoding the type of a function into the name (so-called Hungarian
notation) is brain damaged - the compiler knows the types anyway and can
check those, and it only confuses the programmer.  No wonder MicroSoft
makes buggy programs.

LOCAL variable names should be short, and to the point.  If you have
some random integer loop counter, it should probably be called @var{i}.
Calling it @var{loop_counter} is non-productive, if there is no chance
of it being mis-understood.  Similarly, @var{tmp} can be just about any
type of variable that is used to hold a temporary value.

If you are afraid to mix up your local variable names, you have another
problem, which is called the @dfn{function-growth-hormone-imbalance
syndrome}.  See next.

@heading Functions
@cindex functions
@cindex coding style, functions
Functions should be short and sweet, and do just one thing.  They should
fit on one or two screenfuls of text (the ISO/ANSI screen size is 80x24,
as we all know), and do one thing and do that well.

A function's return type should be put on a line by itself like this:

@smallexample
int
main(int argc, char **argv)
@{
	...
	...
@}
@end smallexample

This also helps things like @code{etags}.

The maximum length of a function is inversely proportional to the
complexity and indentation level of that function.  So, if you have a
conceptually simple function that is just one long (but simple)
case-statement, where you have to do lots of small things for a lot of
different cases, it's OK to have a longer function.

However, if you have a complex function, and you suspect that a
less-than-gifted first-year high-school student might not even
understand what the function is all about, you should adhere to the
maximum limits all the more closely.  Use helper functions with
descriptive names (you can ask the compiler to in-line them if you think
it's performance-critical, and it will probably do a better job of it
than you would have done).

Another measure of the function is the number of local variables.  They
shouldn't exceed 5-10, or you're doing something wrong.  Re-think the
function, and split it into smaller pieces.  A human brain can
generally easily keep track of about 7 different things, anything more
and it gets confused.  You know you're brilliant, but maybe you'd like
to understand what you did 2 weeks from now.

@heading Commenting
@cindex commenting
@cindex comments
@cindex coding style, commenting
@cindex coding style, comments
Comments are good, but there is also a danger of over-commenting.
@emph{NEVER} try to explain @emph{HOW} your code works in a comment:
it's much better to write the code so that the @emph{working} is
obvious, and it's a waste of time to explain badly written code.

Generally, you want your comments to tell @emph{WHAT} your code does, not
@emph{HOW}.  Also, try to avoid putting comments inside a function body:
if the function is so complex that you need to separately comment parts of
it, you should probably go back to section on @dfn{Functions} for a while.
You can make small comments to note or warn about something particularly
clever (or ugly), but try to avoid excess.  Instead, put the comments at
the head of the function, telling people what it does, and possibly WHY it
does it.

A comment in C looks like @code{/* a comment */}.  A comment in C++
looks like @code{// a comment}.  Don't get them confused and don't
@emph{ever} use C++ style comments.

This style of commenting in C @emph{is} acceptable:

@smallexample
/*
 * A comment style in C that is quite often used
 * for multi-line comments.
 */
@end smallexample


@heading Macros
@cindex macro
@cindex coding style, macros
Names of macros defining constants and labels in enums are capitalised.

@smallexample
#define CONSTANT 0x12345
@end smallexample

Enums are preferred when defining several related constants.

CAPITALISED macro names are appreciated but macros resembling functions
may be named in lower case.

Generally, inline functions are preferable to macros resembling functions.

Macros with multiple statements should be enclosed in a do - while block:

@smallexample
<<<<<<< HEAD
#define macrofun(a,b,c)			\
=======
#define macrofun(a,b,c) 			\
>>>>>>> master
	do @{					\
		if (a == 5)			\
			do_this(b,c);		\
	@} while (0)
@end smallexample

@subheading Things to avoid when using macros:
@cindex macro
@enumerate
@item
macros that affect control flow:

@smallexample
#define FOO(x)					\
	do @{					\
		if (blah(x) < 0)		\
			return -EBUGGERED;	\
	@} while(0)
@end smallexample

is a @emph{very} bad idea.  It looks like a function call but exits the "calling"
function; don't break the internal parsers of those who will read the code.

@item
macros that depend on having a local variable with a magic name:

@smallexample
#define FOO(val) bar(index, val)
@end smallexample

might look like a good thing, but it's confusing as hell when one reads the
code and it's prone to breakage from seemingly innocent changes.

@item
macros with arguments that are used as l-values: FOO(x) = y; will
bite you if somebody e.g. turns FOO into an inline function.

@item
forgetting about precedence: macros defining constants using expressions
must enclose the expression in parentheses. Beware of similar issues with
macros using parameters.

@smallexample
#define CONSTANT 0x4000
#define CONSTEXP (CONSTANT | 3)
@end smallexample
@end enumerate

@heading Further Reading
@cindex further reading
@cindex coding style, further reading
@display
The C Programming Language, Second Edition
by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie.
Prentice Hall, Inc., 1988.
ISBN 0-13-110362-8 (paperback), 0-13-110370-9 (hardback).
@uref{http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/cbook/}

The Practice of Programming
by Brian W. Kernighan and Rob Pike.
Addison-Wesley, Inc., 1999.
ISBN 0-201-61586-X.
@uref{http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/tpop/}
@end display

GNU manuals - where in compliance with K&R and this text - for cpp, gcc,
gcc internals and indent, all available from @uref{http://www.gnu.org/}

WG14 is the international standardization working group for the programming
language C, @uref{http://std.dkuug.dk/JTC1/SC22/WG14/}

@node SXEmacs Specific Style,,General C Style, Coding Style

@chapter SXEmacs Specific Style
@cindex sxemacs specific coding style
@cindex coding style, sxemacs specific

This section was lifted almost word for word from the XEmacs
@file{CODING-STANDARDS} by Ben Wing.

@heading Specially-prefixed functions/variables:
@cindex coding style, function prefix
@cindex coding style, variable prefix
@cindex coding style, functions
@cindex coding style, variables
@itemize @bullet
@item
All global C variables whose value is constant and is a symbol begin
with a capital Q, e.g. @var{Qkey_press_event}. (The type will always be
@dfn{Lisp_Object}.)

@item
All other global C variables whose value is a @dfn{Lisp_Object} (this
includes variables that forward into Lisp variables plus others like
@var{Vselected_console}) begin with a capital V.

@item
No C variables whose value is other than a @dfn{Lisp_Object} should begin
with a capital V. (This includes C variables that forward into
integer or boolean Lisp variables.)
All global C variables whose value is a struct Lisp_Subr begin with a
capital S. (This only occurs in connection with DEFUN ()).

@item
All C functions that are Lisp primitives begin with a capital F,
and no others should begin this way.
@end itemize

@heading Functions for manipulating Lisp types:
@cindex coding style, functions
@itemize @bullet
@item
Any function that creates an empty or mostly empty Lisp object
should begin allocate_(). (*Not* make_().) (Except, of course,
for Lisp primitives, which usually begin Fmake_()).

@item
Any function that converts a pointer into an equivalent Lisp_Object
should begin make_().

@item
Any function that converts a Lisp_Object into its equivalent pointer
and checks the type and validity of the object (e.g. making sure
it's not dead) should begin decode_().

@item
Any function that looks up a Lisp object (e.g. buffer, face) given
a symbol or string should begin get_(). (Except, of course, for
Lisp primitives, which usually begin Fget_()).
@end itemize

@heading Other:

Any header-file declarations of the sort

@smallexample
   struct foobar;
@end smallexample

go into the @dfn{types} section of @file{lisp.h}.


@node Patches, Feature Requests, Coding Style, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Patches
@cindex patches
@cindex contributions
@cindex diff
@cindex patch

Ideally, the best way to get your patches into the SXEmacs code base is
<<<<<<< HEAD
to set up your own tla repo for SXEmacs and create a new branch.  You
can then send your merge requests to the
@email{sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Patches} mailing list.

You can even automate the process of sending patches by using 
@dfn{tla hooks}.  Take a look in our @file{contrib} directory for a
master hook script plus some example sub-scripts.  The @file{README}
file there explains it.
=======
to have @s{} fetch them directly from your git repo.  If, for any
reason you are not able to set up a repository with read-only access
for (at least) @s{}, that doesn't mean that you can't still contribute
your patches and code.

You can check how to setup a publicly accessible repo at @xref{Setting
up a publicly accessible repo}.
>>>>>>> master

There are a number of different situations and circumstances that you
may find yourself in with regards to contributing to the SXEmacs
project.  I'll try to cover the main ones here, but please note that
they @emph{all} have two things in common@dots{}

@enumerate
@item
A diff is always sent to 
@email{sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Patches}.
@item
The diff is always in @dfn{unified} format  
@code{diff -u oldfile newfile}
@end enumerate

@menu
<<<<<<< HEAD
* Mirrored branch::             Your own branch of the main repo.
* Non-mirrored branch::         As above, but it isn't mirrored anywhere.
* Non-branched repo::           A copy of the main repo, not branched or
                                mirrored.
* Vanilla sources (no repo)::   Just the source tree that isn't under
                                arch control.
@end menu

@node Mirrored branch, Non-mirrored branch, Patches, Patches
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Mirrored branch
=======
* Sending a patch from a git repo::
                                Procedure to send a patch from a git repo,
                                be it a publicly accessible one, or just a
                                private clone from the master repo.
* Vanilla sources (no repo)::   Just the source tree that isn't under
                                git control.
@end menu

@node Sending a patch from a git repo, Vanilla sources (no repo), Patches, Patches
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Sending a patch from a git repo
>>>>>>> master
@cindex patches
@cindex contributions
@cindex diff
@cindex patch

<<<<<<< HEAD
Are you in the right place?  You have set up your own branch of the
SXEmacs arch repository, something like:
@dfn{sxemacs--yourname--@cver{}}.  And your repository is mirrored
somewhere that is accessible to at least the SXEmacs Project Lead
(@sy{}). 

Yes?  OK, great, read on.

The first thing you want to do, if you haven't already is to set up some
tla hooks to make life much easier.  I highly recommend the hook
scripts you'll find in our @file{contrib} directory.  The
@file{README} there explains it all.

Now all you need is to combine @file{hook} with a couple of
tiny shell scripts.  These are the ones that I use@dots{}

For automatic mirroring:

@smallexample
#!/bin/bash

echo "Mirroring $@{ARCH_BRANCH@} in $@{ARCH_ARCHIVE@}"

tla archive-mirror \
    "$@{ARCH_ARCHIVE@}" "$@{ARCH_ARCHIVE@}-MIRROR" \
    "$@{ARCH_CATEGORY@}" 

exit 0
@end smallexample

For sending commit logs/merge requests:
@smallexample
#!/bin/bash

if [ "$ARCH_REVISION" = "" ]; then
    echo "$0 called without ARCH_REVISION set. Aborting."
    exit 1
fi

email="sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org"

# This is where _other_ people access your repo.
location=http://your.archive.mirror/

echo "Sending mail to SXEmacs Patches <$@{email@}>"
echo "  about $@{ARCH_REVISION@} changes."

# We may want to start that as a background process if it starts to
# take too long...
(
echo "From: $(tla my-id)"
echo "Date: $(date --rfc-822)"
echo "Subject: [Merge Req] Summary for $@{ARCH_REVISION@}"
echo "To: SXEmacs Patches <$@{email@}>"
echo
echo "Location: $@{ARCH_ARCHIVE@} $@{location@}"
echo
tla cat-archive-log "$@{ARCH_ARCHIVE@}/$@{ARCH_REVISION@}"
echo
cd $@{ARCH_TREE_ROOT@}
dir="$@{ARCH_REVISION@}.changeset-$$"
tla get-changeset "$@{ARCH_REVISION@}" "$@{dir@}"
tla show-changeset --diffs "$@{dir@}"
rm -rf "$@{dir@}"
) | /usr/sbin/sendmail "$@{email@}"

exit 0
@end smallexample

With all that in place, getting patches in front of the SXEmacs
developers is a snap.

@enumerate
@item
@code{tla star-merge MAIN_SXEmacs_REPO} (to make sure you are working
with up to date sources).
@item
@code{tla commit -s "sync up to mainline"}
@item
@code{tla make-log}
@item
hack hack hack hack
@item
edit the log
@item
@code{tla commit}
@end enumerate

BTW, if you've gone to this much effort to set things up, you @emph{are}
subscribed to the sxemacs-patches and sxemacs-devel mailing lists aren't
you? :-)


@node Non-mirrored branch, Non-branched repo, Mirrored branch, Patches
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Non-mirrored branch
@cindex patches
@cindex contributions
@cindex diff
@cindex patch

Are you in the right place?  You have set up your own branch of the
SXEmacs arch repository, something like:
@dfn{sxemacs--yourname--@cver{}}.  But your repository is @emph{not}
mirrored anywhere that is accessible to at least the SXEmacs Project
Lead (@sy{}).

Yes?  OK, great, read on.

Firstly, if you can mirror your archive, please do so.  It will make
things so much easier for everyone.  We do understand that there may be
some valid reasons why you can't mirror, hence, this section.

This section differs from the previous only in that because you have no
mirror the SXEmacs developers can't pull in your changesets.  You will
have to send them to the patches mailing list yourself.

To create a changeset that you can send as a MIME attachment to the
mailing list, take these steps after you have committed your changes to
your repo:

@enumerate
@item
@code{tla get-changeset patch-n} (@dfn{patch-n} is the patch number you
just committed)
When that finishes you will find a new directory in your WD, it will be
named something like @file{sxemacs--yourname--@cver{}--patch-1.patches}.
@item
tar/gz that directory
@item
Send the @file{file.tar.gz} as a MIME attachment to the
@email{sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Patches} mailing list.
@end enumerate


@node Non-branched repo, Vanilla sources (no repo), Non-mirrored branch, Patches
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Non-branched repo
@cindex patches
@cindex contributions
@cindex diff
@cindex patch

Are you in the right place?  You did something like:
@code{tla get steve@@sxemacs.org--@yy{}/sxemacs--main--@cver{} sxemacs}
But for whatever reason you haven't made your own branch of the repo
(perhaps you don't wish to become a regular contributor, which is
totally cool, BTW).

Yes?  OK, great, read on.

If this is the right section for you then you need not worry about
setting up any tla hooks or stuff like that.  Why?  Because you won't be
committing anything.

Your hacking cycle will look something like this:

@enumerate
@item
@code{tla update}
@item
@code{tla make-log}
@item
hack hack hack
@item
edit the log
@item
send the log and the output from @code{tla changes --diffs} to the
@email{sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Patches} mailing list.
@end enumerate

@node Vanilla sources (no repo),, Non-branched repo, Patches
=======
Firstly, if you can set up an accessible remote repo, please do so.
You can see how easy it is in section @xref{Setting up a publicly
accessible repo}.  It will make things so much easier for everyone.
We do understand that there may be some valid reasons why you can't,
and that is okay, this section still provides a valid workflow.


@subheading Preparing a patch from a git repo

Are you in the right place?  You cloned the SXEmacs sources with
@code{git clone http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs}.

Yes?  OK, great, read on.

Your workflow should run something along these lines@dots{}

@enumerate
@item
@code{git pull} from your master branch to sync up with the main
SXEmacs repo.
@item
@code{git checkout -b mybugfix} to create and checkout a new branch.
You can call it whatever you like, just as long as @emph{you} know
what it's about. (Yeah, we recommend that you do all your work on
branches and keep your master branch as pristine as possible).
@item
hack hack edit edit fix fix hack
@item
Test!  If all is good, proceed.  If not, return to the previous step.
@item
Depending on how you like to deal with change logs, and if the changes
were small and trivial or detailed and large:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{git commit -sam "Summary of changes"}  For use with small quick
changes that don't really warrant verbose logs to document them.
@item
@code{git commit -sa}  This form will fire up an editor for you to
write your change logs in@footnote{You can set which editor to use
with @code{git config --global core.editor my_fav_editor}. @s{} has
his set to a shell function called @dfn{edit} which fires up gnuclient
if SXEmacs is running, or SXEmacs if not.}.
@item
@code{git commit -saF mylogfile}  Use this form for the times when you
have logged your changes as you went to the file @file{mylogfile}.
@end itemize

Please take note, that whichever commit command you use, to
@emph{always} use the @code{-s} option to add a @dfn{Signed-off-by}
entry to the log.  This will indicate that you played some role in
getting the patch into the code base, and, perhaps more importantly,
you had permission to do so@footnote{There might be
licencing/copyright things to be aware of, especially in the case of
working on SXEmacs either for your employer, or during your employer's
time.}.

For patches that you're submitting to the main SXEmacs code base that
have originated from somebody else (maybe you have a small team of
sub-developers working for you), the @dfn{Signed-off-by} entry also
indicates that you have reviewed, tested, and approved the patch.  And
also, the original author has permission to submit it.
@item
@code{git checkout master}  To flip back to your master branch.
@item
@code{git merge --no-ff mybugfix}  To merge the changes from the
@dfn{mybugfix} branch into master.  The @code{--no-ff} forces git to
create a new commit object even if a fast-forward could have been used
to carry out the merge.

At this point everything that was in the @dfn{mybugfix} branch is now
in your master branch, so you no longer need it. You can safely delete
it with @code{git branch -d mybugfix}.

Now if you have a publicly accessible repo, you should do:
@item
@code{git push myremote master}  To push the changes to your publicly
accessible repo, @dfn{myremote}.
@end enumerate

If your repos is private, it is safe to skip the push and just advance
to the next step.

@subheading @anchor{Patch Submission}Patch Submission

At this point, your changes are ready for @s{} to be incorporated into
the main SXEmacs code base.  All you need to do is let him know, and
you can easily do that with the following 2 git commands:

@enumerate
@item
@code{git format-patch --add-header="X-Git-Repo: REPO-URL" \@*
@indent
--subject-prefix="P-Req" --numbered -o DIR origin}
@item
@code{git send-email \@*
@indent
--to="SXEmacs Patches <sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org>" \@*
@indent
--from="$(git config user.name) <$(git config user.email)>" DIR}
@end enumerate

If you not have have a publicly accessible repository, the SXEmacs
developers can't pull in your changesets directly from you.  Instead,
once your patch hits the mailing list and is approved, it will be
applied manually to the SXEmacs code base.

You could, in theory, use a post-commit hook, but I'd not recommend
it.  Think about the situation where you are working on something
fairly big.  You'd most likely commit several times before you have
things ready for us.

If you have a publicly accessible repo, be sure to setup automation
like in @xref{Automation}.

@node Vanilla sources (no repo),, Sending a patch from a git repo, Patches
>>>>>>> master
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Vanilla sources (no repo)
@cindex patches
@cindex contributions
@cindex diff
@cindex patch

Are you in the right place?  All you have is a SXEmacs source tarball
<<<<<<< HEAD
and you don't have @file{tla} installed.
=======
and you don't have @file{git} installed.
>>>>>>> master

Yes?  OK, great, read on.

You will have the toughest time of it I'm afraid because you will have
to do everything manually.  But it isn't too bad.  No worse than for any
other project.

Your hacking cycle will look something like this:

@enumerate
@item
Unpack the source tarball somewhere and @emph{don't touch it}.  This
will be your pristine sources.
@item
Make a copy of your pristine sources somewhere else.  This will be your
working tree where you make your changes.
@item
cd into your working tree and hack hack hack
@item
Jump out of your working tree and do:
@code{diff -urNp pristine-tree working-tree > my-sxemacs.diff}

A note of caution here: Please ensure that you are diff'ing clean
trees.  In other words, run @code{make distclean} in your working tree
@emph{before} creating the diff.
@item
Send @file{my-sxemacs.diff} (gzip'd if large) as a MIME attachment
together with a detailed description of your changes to the
@email{sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Patches} mailing list.
@end enumerate

@node Feature Requests, Support Requests, Patches, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Feature Requests
@cindex request, feature

From time to time someone will wander into the mailing list or our
IRC channel saying something like "ya know, SXEmacs is cool, but it
would truly @emph{rock} if it had @dfn{fooble-klangers}.  How 'bout
it guys?  Can somebody please add @dfn{fooble-klangers} to SXEmacs?".  

@emph{That's} a @dfn{Feature Request}.

It doesn't matter what a @dfn{fooble-klanger} is.  It doesn't matter
if having said @dfn{fooble-klanger} would make SXEmacs rock or not.
What @strong{DOES MATTER} is that we acknowledge the request.  And we
acknowledge it quickly.

So how quick is quickly?  Anything greater than 48 hours is @emph{slow}.
We should try to get an initial ack out within 24 hours of the feature
request hitting the mailing list@footnote{All legitimate feature requests
should eventually end up on the @uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, SXEmacs
Issue Tracker}.}.  I totally understand that the 24 hour turn-around
won't always be possible.  Often there'll be extenuating circumstances
(I'm writing this right now in the middle of a 2 week period with no
internet connection).

The acknowledgment doesn't need to be anything more than just that, an
acknowledgment.  You don't need to have a 100,000 lines of working
code that proves how much @dfn{fooble-klangers} make or don't make
SXEmacs rock before you let the guy know that he isn't talking to a
brick wall.

A feature request can only end up in one of 3 scenarios...

@enumerate 1
@item
Implemented code.
@item
Discarded idea.
@item
Forgotten about.
@end enumerate

Of those, #3 is @strong{UNACCEPTABLE}!  That means, if you see a
feature request that is more than 48 hours old and hasn't been
acknowledged, it is @strong{YOUR} responsibility to do something about
it.

<<<<<<< HEAD
A feature requests on our @uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, Issue
=======
A feature request on our @uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, Issue
>>>>>>> master
Tracker} is a issue that has the @dfn{FeatReq} flag set and the
severity set to @dfn{enhancement}.


@node Support Requests, Bug Reports, Feature Requests, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Support Requests
@cindex request, support

Support requests are a call for help from our users and as such have
@emph{top priority}.  Much of @xref{Feature Requests}, applies equally
here.

Support requests are @emph{everyone's} responsibility, so if you see
one and you think you can help, do so.

@node Bug Reports, Making Releases, Support Requests, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Bug Reports
@cindex report, bug

Bug reports are a @emph{good} thing.  They show that people are using
the code that you spent so much time and effort in writing.  Bug
reports are an opportunity to improve SXEmacs.  Never be scared of bug
reports.  Never get annoyed or upset by bug reports.  Welcome them.
As a matter of fact, worry if you don't see any bug reports.  That
would mean we aren't working hard enough. :-)

All bug reports have to be submitted to our
@uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, Issue Tracker}.  So it goes without
saying that you already have an account on our Issue Tracker, and if
you don't, go get one @emph{now}.

Because the Issue Tracker is just that, it @dfn{tracks} issues, all
followups and correspondence concerning a bug @emph{must} be added via
the issue tracker itself.  @emph{DO NOT} follow up to a bug report on
the mailing list.  If a bug report is submitted to the mailing list
initially (because the submitter wasn't aware of our Issue Tracker),
the person submitting the report should be directed to our
@uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, Issue Tracker}.  If they are
unwilling or unable to do so, one of us will do so.

If a bug report results in a patch and merge request, the summary of
the patch log should contain the text: "(Closes bug #n)", where `n' is
the number that our Issue Tracker has assigned to that bug.  The bug
should be marked as "fixed" (stating in which revision) on the Issue
Tracker.  It should not be marked "Closed" until just prior to a
release.  Closing bugs is the job and responsibility of the project
lead, or whoever is responsible for making releases.


@node Making Releases, New Features, Bug Reports, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Making Releases
@cindex release

<<<<<<< HEAD
From time to time, at the project lead's discretion, a "version-0"
revision will be made and tarballs created and made available on
<<<<<<< HEAD
@uref{ftp://ftp.sxemacs.org/pub/sxemacs/, the SXEmacs FTP site}.
=======
@uref{http://downloads.sxemacs.org/releases/, the SXEmacs download site}.
>>>>>>> origin/master
=======
From time to time, at the project lead's discretion, a release
will be made and tarballs created and made available on
@uref{http://downloads.sxemacs.org/releases/, the SXEmacs download site}.
>>>>>>> master

The decision as to @emph{when} to cut a release is generally
influenced by two factors:

@enumerate 1
@item
How stable the code base is currently.
@item
Whether the changes since the last release warrant a new release.
@end enumerate

The minimum number of revisions between releases is one.  The maximum
number of revisions between releases is, well, there is no maximum.

The actual steps involved in cutting a release are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Finalise things like...
@itemize
@item
Update @file{etc/NEWS}
@item
Make sure @file{INSTALL}, @file{PROBLEMS} etc are up to date.
@item
Update @file{sxemacs.texi} at@dots{}
@quotation
It corresponds to:
  version-string
@end quotation
<<<<<<< HEAD
@end itemize
@item
Seal the achive...

@code{tla commit --seal}
=======
@item
Update the codename and version in @file{autogen.sh}
@item
Update the versioning macros in this document.
@end itemize
@item
Commit those updates.

@code{git commit -sam "SXEmacs v@nver{} is released!"}
@item
Create a new tag which will be the version number of this release.

@code{git tag -s v@nver{} -m "SXEmacs v@nver{}"}
@item
Push it to the public repo.

@code{git push --tags origin master}
>>>>>>> master
@item
Prepare tarball:

(in the release working directory)

<<<<<<< HEAD
@example
tla export /tmp/sxemacs-@cver{}
@end example
=======
@smallexample
git archive --format=tar \
    --prefix=sxemacs-@nver{}/ HEAD | \
    (cd ~/upload && tar xf -)
@end smallexample
>>>>>>> master

@item
Clean out the working directory and do autotool preparations.

<<<<<<< HEAD
@example
HAMMER=BHFH ./autogen.sh
@end example
=======
@smallexample
HAMMER=1 ./autogen.sh
@end smallexample
>>>>>>> master

@item
Copy the autotool files to the exported tree

<<<<<<< HEAD
@example
for f in $(tla inventory -p); do
    cp -va $@{f@} /tmp/sxemacs-@cver{}/$@{f@}
done &&
cp -va libltdl /tmp/sxemacs-@cver{}
@end example
=======
@smallexample
cp -va libltdl ~/upload/sxemacs-@nver{} &&
for f in $(git ls-files --others -i --exclude-standard); do
    cp -va $@{f@} ~/upload/sxemacs-@nver{}/$@{f@}
done
@end smallexample
>>>>>>> master

@item
Add a ChangeLog

<<<<<<< HEAD
@example
tla changelog --untagged > /tmp/sxemacs-@cver{}/ChangeLog
@end example
=======
@smallexample
git log --stat v@cver{}..v@nver{} > ~/upload/sxemacs-@nver{}/ChangeLog
@end smallexample
>>>>>>> master

@item
Create the tarball:

<<<<<<< HEAD
@example
cd /tmp
tar --create --owner=0 --group=0 --gzip --file \
  ~/upload/sxemacs-@cver{}.tar.gz sxemacs-@cver{}
@end example

@item
Create md5:

@example
cd ~/upload
md5sum sxemacs-@cver{}.tar.gz > sxemacs-@cver{}.tar.gz.md5
@end example

@item
create gpg sig:

@example
gpg --detach-sign --armor \
  --output sxemacs-@cver{}.tar.gz.asc sxemacs-@cver{}.tar.gz
@end example

@item
Create a diff against the previous version.

=======
@smallexample
cd ~/upload
for type in bz2 gz lzma xz; do
    tar --create --owner=0 --group=0 --auto-compress --file \
        sxemacs-@nver{}.tar.$@{type@} sxemacs-@nver{}
    md5sum sxemacs-@nver{}.tar.$@{type@} > sxemacs-@nver{}.tar.$@{type@}.md5
    gpg --detach-sign --armor \
      --output sxemacs-@nver{}.tar.$@{type@}.asc sxemacs-@nver{}.tar.$@{type@}
done
@end smallexample
@item
@c replace this with the appropriate git magic
Create a diff against the previous version.
>>>>>>> master
@itemize
@item
Unpack the previous release's tarball
@item
@example
<<<<<<< HEAD
diff -urNp sxemacs-@pver{} sxemacs-@cver{} > sxemacs-@pver{}-@cver{}.diff
gzip sxemacs-@pver{}-@cver{}.diff
=======
diff -urNp sxemacs-@cver{} sxemacs-@nver{} > sxemacs-@cver{}-@nver{}.diff
gzip sxemacs-@cver{}-@nver{}.diff
>>>>>>> master
@end example
@end itemize

@item
Create md5 and gpg sig for diff file.

See items describing this for the release tarball.

@item
Move the tarball, diff, GnuPG sigs, and md5sums to
@uref{http://downloads.sxemacs.org/releases/, SXEmacs Download Site}.

@item
<<<<<<< HEAD
Rename the @file{LATEST-IS-foo} file.
@example
mv LATEST-IS-@pver{} LATEST-IS-@cver{}
=======
Rename the @file{LATEST-IS-VER} file.
@example
mv LATEST-IS-@cver{} LATEST-IS-@nver{}
>>>>>>> master
@end example

@item
Update www.sxemacs.org:

@itemize
@item
Update @file{download.html}
@item
<<<<<<< HEAD
Add @file{ChangeLog-@cver{}} to the website
=======
Add @file{ChangeLog-@nver{}} to the website
>>>>>>> master
@item
Update @file{index.html}
@end itemize

@item
Send a release announcement to @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org,
SXEmacs Devel} and comp.emacs.xemacs.

@item
Make a new release and  announcement on Freshmeat (our FM id: 52281) 

@item
<<<<<<< HEAD
Create next version:

@example
tla tag -S sxemacs--main--@cver{}--version-0 sxemacs--main--@nver{}

tla get sxemacs--main--@nver{} /path/to/WDs/sxemacs--main--@nver{}

tla changelog --dir /path/to/WDs/sxemacs--main--@nver{} --untagged \
  steve@@sxemacs.org--@yy{}/sxemacs--main--@cver{} > \
  ./ChangeLog.d/ChangeLog-@cver{}

tla add ChangeLog.d/ChangeLog-@cver{}
@end example

@item
Update the codename in @file{autogen.sh}
@item
Update the versioning macros in this document.
@item
Commit the first patch to the next version.
=======
Commit the first patch to the next version, which would be adding a
@file{ChangeLog.d/ChangeLog-@nver} 
>>>>>>> master
@end itemize


@node New Features, Compatibility, Making Releases, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter New Features
@cindex feature, new

How do you get a new feature into SXEmacs?  It's not hard, but
remember this, we look at any new feature in this order of
priority... 

@enumerate 1
@item
Tested working code.
@item
A plan of action with @dfn{Proof of concept} code.
@item
A plan of action with a willingness to write the code.
@item
An idea with a willingness to move it to a real plan and then to
code. 
@item
An idea with a willingness to help test any code resulting from it.
@item
@dfn{Hey, wouldn't it be cool if...}
@end enumerate

Don't be disheartened if you aren't a master programmer, quite often
the best new features and ideas come from non-programmers.  All too
often the people writing the code get caught up in what they are doing
and find it hard to see things from @dfn{outside of the box}.  Anyone
can help with ideas and with testing new code and features.

Any new feature begins with an idea, and at @emph{that} point somebody
should post that idea to @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs
Devel}.

@node Compatibility, Copyright and Licencing, New Features, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Compatibility
@cindex compatibility, xemacs
@cindex compatibility, emacs

All I'll say about this is that for the foreseeable future, SXEmacs
will remain 100% backwardly compatible with XEmacs where emacs lisp is
concerned.  An emacs lisp package or library that runs on XEmacs
@emph{will} run on SXEmacs.

If you find a place where this isn't true, you should report it as a
bug, @xref{Bug Reports}.

If you find areas where SXEmacs is incompatible with GNU/Emacs at the
emacs lisp level, that is an issue between GNU/Emacs and XEmacs.

@node Copyright and Licencing, Developer Recruitment, Compatibility, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Copyright and Licencing

SXEmacs is an @dfn{Open Source} project.  Because of that we can only
accept code and contributions that are covered by an Open Source
licence.

We differ from the GNU/Emacs project in that we will accept any
@dfn{OSI} approved Open Source licence, not just the GNU GPL.  That
means that if you are more comfortable with, say, the BSD licence,
that's cool by us.

We also won't ask you to reassign your copyright to anyone else.  If
you want to reassign your copyright to the FSF (for example), you can,
but we won't reject any contributions from you because you haven't.
@footnote{If you contribute code to SXEmacs that you want included in
GNU/Emacs you will have to reassign copyright to the FSF.  Please
understand that that is a GNU/Emacs requirement and @emph{not} a
SXEmacs requirement}

@subheading SXEmacs and your Employer
This is @strong{very} important.  If you write code for SXEmacs either
on your employer's time (while you are at work), or using your
employer's resources (hardware, software, electricity, furniture, etc)
then your employer may have legal copyright of your work.

@strong{PLEASE} be up front with your employer and clear it with them
@strong{before} you write anything for SXEmacs.  It is OK and
perfectly acceptable to submit contributions to SXEmacs that are
copyrighted to your employer, providing (and this is the key) your
employer is willing to release the code under an approved OSI
licence.

Don't overlook or dismiss this.  It is here to safeguard you, your
employer, the SXEmacs project as a whole, and @sy{} personally.

@subheading Documentation Licences
Please don't licence any documentation under the FSF's new @dfn{Free
Documentation Licence}.  This isn't a slight against the FSF or the
GNU project, it is just because it will mean that our documentation
would not be able to be included in XEmacs.  It may even cause
problems going the other way as well (XEmacs to SXEmacs).

For that reason, we'll err on the side of caution.

@node Developer Recruitment, Making/Altering Policies, Copyright and Licencing, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Developer Recruitment
@cindex recruitment

We don't actively try to recruit new developers in any kind of formal
way.  What we do is use SXEmacs for everything everyday and not hide
the fact that we do. :-)  That in itself makes people curious and some
ask about this thing called @dfn{SXEmacs}.  Show them what it is,
point them to the @uref{http://www.sxemacs.org/, web site}, encourage
them to subscribe to @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs
Devel}, and even help them get an account on
@uref{http://issues.sxemacs.org/, Our Issue Tracker}.  And low and
behold!  We have a new developer.

One recruitment tool that we do have is @dfn{sxemacs.org} email
addresses.  If you'd like one, contact @sye{}.  Then you can use that
email address whenever and whereever you like.  Hmm, perhaps not
@emph{everywhere}, it might not look so good if you use it for log in
details to a pr0n site. :-P

@node Making/Altering Policies, Version Control, Developer Recruitment, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Making/Altering Policies
@cindex policies, changing

How do you get these policies and proceedures changed?  Simple.  Just
post to @email{sxemacs-devel@@sxemacs.org, SXEmacs Devel} stating
where what how when and why.  If it is non-controversial and makes
sense, it'll probably be accepted quickly.  If not, there could be
lengthy @dfn{discussions} and possibly even a vote @xref{Voting}.

@sy{} will always have the final word and make the ultimate decision,
but he isn't an immovable force, his mind can be changed and he
@emph{does} listen to what the rest of the project is saying. :-)

@node Version Control, Concept Index, Making/Altering Policies, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Version Control
@cindex version control
@cindex arch
@cindex tla
<<<<<<< HEAD

The SXEmacs Project keeps control of its sources with GNU/arch (tla).
=======
@cindex git

The SXEmacs Project keeps control of its sources with git, starting
with version 22.1.13.
>>>>>>> master
The main repository is that of the Project Lead (@sy{}).  It is
located at:

@smallexample
<<<<<<< HEAD
  http://arch.sxemacs.org/@yy{}/
@end smallexample

To ``check out'' a copy of SXEmacs from Steve's repo, take the following
steps (this assumes that you have tla installed/configured):

@enumerate
@item
@code{tla register-archive http://arch.sxemacs.org/@yy{}}
@item
@code{tla get steve@@sxemacs.org--@yy{}/sxemacs--main--@cver{} sxemacs}
@end enumerate

That will put a copy of the latest SXEmacs sources into
@file{$PWD/sxemacs}.

@subheading Making Your Own Branch
The best for all concerned is for all active developers to have their
own branch of the SXEmacs repo.  What follows is how to set up your
own branch of the SXEmacs source repo.

I'll start from the point where you have compiled tla and have it
somewhere in your $PATH.

@enumerate 1
@item
Introduce yourself to tla:

@example
$ tla my-id "Joe User <juser@@email.addy>" RET
@end example

The value you give to `tla my-id' is used in logs and stuff like that.
It @emph{must} be enclosed in quotes.  You can check its value by
running the command again without giving it any value...

@example
$ tla my-id RET
@end example

@item
Create an archive which will be home to @emph{your} repo:

@example
$ tla make-archive --tla --signed juser@@email.addy--@yy{} \
    /path/to/archives/@yy{}/ RET
@end example

The @option{--signed} option is to make your archive a @dfn{signed} one. (see
2a for dealing with GnuPG and tla) This means you'll be GnuPG signing
all commits to your repo.  If you don't have GnuPG set up or you don't
want a signed archive, omit this option to make-archive.  (All of @sy{}'
archives are signed).

It isn't mandatory to have a @dfn{dated} archive name (the @option{--@yy{}}
part of @dfn{juser@@email.addy---@yy{}}), but I use that semantic for my
archives to keep things neat and tidy.  One of the SXEmacs developers
has an archive name of: @dfn{hroptatyr@@sxemacs.org--sxemacs}, which is
just as valid.

The location, @file{/path/to/archives/@yy{}/} is somewhere that is writable
to @emph{you}.  Nobody else needs to have access to this directory (not
even read only access) so it could easily be in your $HOME.  Setting
up a @dfn{mirror} that @emph{is} readable to the outside world (ie, where @sy{} can
reach it) is the subject of the step 3. 

The thing to remember about this path is that @file{archives} @emph{MUST}
exist and @file{@yy{}} @emph{MUST NOT} exist.

@enumerate a
@item
Setting up tla to work with GnuPG (skip this if your archive isn't
signed or you don't wish to verify signed patchsets):

@example
$ mkdir ~/.arch-params/signing RET

$ echo "gpg --clearsign" > ~/.arch-params/signing/\=default RET

$ echo "gpg --verify-files -" > \
   ~/.arch-params/signing/\=default.check RET
@end example

From this point, every commit action will require you to enter your
GnuPG passphrase, you may want to look into a @dfn{passphrase agent}.
@end enumerate

@item
Mirroring your archive so others (at least, Steve) can reach it:

@example
$ tla make-archive --tla --signed --listing --mirror \
   juser@@email.addy--@yy{} \
   /path/to/internet/accessible/archives/@yy{}/ RET
@end example

See step 2 for explanation of @option{--signed} here.

The @option{--listing} option enables creating some @file{.listing} files
in your mirror'd repos.  It makes retrieval of your repo possible via
HTTP without needing stuff like WebDAV.  Basically, don't worry about
it, but @dfn{DON'T FORGET} to use this option.

The @option{--mirror} option means that this archive is a mirror of the
@dfn{juser@@email.addy---@yy{}} archive.  Its name will actually be
@dfn{juser@@email.addy---@yy{}-MIRROR}.  That leads me to the name...

You @dfn{MUST} use the exact name you used in step 2.

The path, @file{/path/to/internet/accessible/archives/@yy{}/} is the
path for @emph{you} to write to the mirror.  It @emph{isn't} the path
for others to read from it.  An example...

@example
My repo is accessible to the world at:
http://arch.sxemacs.org/@yy{}/  

but @emph{I} write to it via:
sftp://youngs@@arch.sxemacs.org/home/youngs/arch/SXEmacs/@yy{}/
@end example

The same applies to this path as for the one in step 2... @file{archives}
@emph{MUST} exist and @file{@yy{}} @emph{MUST NOT} exist.  Also, the path
you give here @emph{CANNOT} be the same path as the one in step 2.

@item
Making an archive your default one:

@example
$ tla my-default-archive juser@@email.addy--@yy{} RET
@end example

This sets the archive to where new repo's (your branch of SXEmacs)
will go.  You can check what it is set to at any time with

@example
$ tla my-default-archive RET
@end example

Your default archive is the archive that is used for any tla
operation that you do outside of any working directory and you
don't specify an archive to use.

@item
Registering my (Steve's) archive so you can access it:

@example
$ tla register-archive http://arch.sxemacs.org/@yy{}/ RET
@end example

This tells your tla where and how to find my archive.

@item
Tagging against my (Steve's) repo and creating your branch:

@example
$ tla tag -S \
   steve@@sxemacs.org--@yy{}/sxemacs--main--@cver{}--patch-1 \
   sxemacs--branchname--@cver{} RET
@end example

The `-S' option causes tla to create any needed categories, branches,
or versions in your archive.

It's always best to tag against the latest revision of any repo, and
one way to find the latest revision is:

@example
$ tla abrowse steve@@sxemacs.org--@yy{} RET
@end example

@enumerate a
@item
A note about branch names:

In reality, the name you use for your branch can be anything.  But
here are some @dfn{don'ts} for SXEmacs branches...

@itemize
@item
DON'T use anything vulgar.  I won't ever merge in anything
from `sxemacs---fuckyou---@cver{}'.

@item
DON'T use anything that could be misleading.  In other
words, don't call your branch `sxemacs---voice---@cver{}'
unless you are working on some kind of voice or speech
interface to SXEmacs.

@item
DON'T use anything that could make people think your branch
is the main development branch.  For example, don't use any
of these names:

@example      
dev, devo, devel, develop, development, main,
mainline, stable.
@end example
@end itemize

The easiest thing to do... use your name, or if you are working on
something long-term, use a description of it.
@end enumerate

@item
Getting a working directory of your branch:

@example
$ tla get sxemacs--branchname--@cver{} sxemacs-branchname RET
@end example

That will put a copy of @emph{your} branch in
@file{$PWD/sxemacs-branchname/}. 
     
@item
Updating the contents of your mirror:

@example
$ tla archive-mirror RET
@end example

This synchs your mirror archive to your main archive and makes the
changes you've made to your archive accessible to the rest of the
world.
@end enumerate

Once you're set up, you might have a hacking cycle a bit like this:

@itemize
@item
synch to my repo so you are working from up to date sources

@example
$ cd $WD (working directory)

$ tla star-merge \
   steve@@sxemacs.org--@yy{}/sxemacs--main--@cver{} RET

$ tla commit -s "synch up with the mainline" RET
@end example

@item 
create a new log file for documenting the changes you are about to
make:

@example
$ tla make-log RET
@end example

This creates a blank log file.  Think of it as a ChangeLog file, but
it is only for changes in this particular changeset.  Update the log
as you go, or all at once at the end.  It doesn't matter, just do
whatever is comfortable for you.

Steve's log file tips:

@itemize
@item
log as you go

@item
be as verbose as you can
@end itemize

@item
hack hack hack (which obviously includes testing)
        
@item
finish up the log

@item
commit your changes

@example
$ tla commit RET
@end example

@item
synch up your mirror

@example
$ tla archive-mirror RET
@end example

@item
send a commit log/merge request to sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org

Creating and Sending the commit log/merge request:

@example
$ tla cat-log patch-n > /tmp/merge-mail RET

$ tla get-changeset patch-n ,,foo-changes RET

$ tla show-changeset --diffs ,,foo-changes >> /tmp/merge-mail

$ mail -s "[merge-req] $(tla logs -f|tail -n1)" \
   sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org < /tmp/merge-mail RET

$ rm -rf ,,foo-changes RET
@end example
@end itemize

BTW, a lot of these seemingly mundane tasks can be automated via tla
hooks. 

@subheading Other Developers' Repositories
=======
  http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs
@end smallexample

Checking out a copy of SXEmacs is as easy as:

@smallexample
  git clone http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs
@end smallexample

See how to patches in chapter @xref{Patches}.

@menu
* Setting up a publicly accessible repo::
                                   A git repo that others have read
                                   access to .
* Setting up a private repos::     A git repo only you have access to.
* Other Developers' Repositories:: Git repos of regular developers of 
                                   SXEmacs.
@end menu


@node  Setting up a publicly accessible repo, Setting up a private repos, Version Control, Version Control
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Setting up a publicly accessible repo
@cindex version control
@cindex repo
@cindex git
@cindex contributions

You only need to read this section if you are able to host a publicly
accessible repo somewhere.

Getting everything set up is really very easy.  I think you'll be
quite surprised if you haven't done this sort of thing before.  In the
examples below I'm assuming that you have shell access to your remote
host via ssh@dots{}

@smallexample
user@@localhost ~ $ ssh user@@your.host
user@@host ~ $ mkdir -v sxemacs
user@@host ~ $ cd !$
user@@host ~/sxemacs $ git init --bare
user@@host ~/sxemacs $ echo @dfn{Your Name's SXEmacs Repo} > description
user@@host ~/sxemacs $ exit
user@@localhost ~ $ git clone http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs
user@@localhost ~ $ cd sxemacs
user@@localhost ~/sxemacs $ git remote add myremote \
    ssh://user@@your.host/~/sxemacs
@end smallexample

And that's it!  Told you it was easy, didn't I?  All you have to do
now is push your local copy to your remote@dots{}

@smallexample
git push myremote master
@end smallexample


@subheading @anchor{Automation}Automation

The last two commands for patch submission listed in @xref{Patch
Submission}, @code{format-patch} and @code{send-email} are fairly long
and hairy.  You'd no doubt have trouble remembering them.  But, never
fear, git has a few tricks up her sleeve to make your life easier.

@subsection Automating with Hooks

If you are lucky enough to @emph{NOT} be using github@footnote{github
is great and may be the ideal solution for you to host your repo
somewhere, but it is inflexible in that you get no shell access, you
can't set up custom hooks, and you are very limited in what git config
settings you can tweak.} to host your publicly accessible repo you can
set up a @dfn{post-receive} hook to automatically send your pull
requests to the SXEmacs mailing list when you push to it.

@subsubsection Setting Up The post-receive Hook

Remember: This hook runs from your publicly accessible repo (your
remote), and @emph{NOT} from your local working directory.  It is
called after you push to your remote.

Jump over to your remote now and follow these steps

@enumerate
@item
Take a look in the file
@file{hooks/post-receive.sample}.  At the bottom of that file there is
a commented line, that when uncommented would call another script,
@file{post-receive-email}.  Check that the path is correct, and
uncomment it.
@item
Rename @file{hooks/post-receive.sample} to @file{hooks/post-receive}
@item
Tweak the remote's config with@dots{}

@smallexample
git config hooks.mailinglist \
    "SXEmacs Patches <sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org>"
git config hooks.envelopesender "Your Name <your@@email>"
git config hooks.emailprefix "[P-Req] "
git config hooks.showrev "git show -C %s; echo"
@end smallexample
@item
@code{echo "Your Name's SXEmacs Repo" > description}
@end enumerate

Take note that the SXEmacs mailing lists will funnel any post from
non-subscribers into the moderation queue.  So make sure that the
address you set @dfn{hooks.envelopesender} to is subscribed to the
patches list. 

Also be aware that using this @dfn{post-receive} hook will mean that 
every time you push to your publicly accessible repo, a message will be
sent to sxemacs-patches; this includes instances where you merely 
are pulling the latest from mainline and mirroring. Hence, the use of 
aliases as discussed below may be preferable. 

@subsection @anchor{Automating with Aliases}Automating with Aliases

Git allows you to define aliases that will let you do all kinds of
funky things.  Remember those hairy @code{format-patch} and
@code{send-email} commands?

@smallexample
git config alias.sxe-fp 'format-patch --add-header="X-Git-Repo: REPO-URL" \
    --subject-prefix="P-Req" --numbered'

git config alias.sxe-sm 'send-email \
    --to="SXEmacs Patches <sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org>" \
    --from="$(git config user.name) <$(git config user.email)>"'
@end smallexample

With those 2 aliases set you can get your pull requests in by
doing@dots{}

@code{git sxe-fp -o DIR origin && git sxe-sm DIR}

@subsection Making Life Even Easier with git config

You can make your life even easier by having git store things in its
config.  In this case, you can store those @code{format-patch} and
@code{send-email} command line options in the repo's config@dots{}

@smallexample
git config format.headers "X-Git-Repo: YOUR-REMOTE-URL"
git config format.subjectprefix "P-Req"
git config format.numbered true

git config sendemail.to \
    "SXEmacs Patches <sxemacs-patches@@sxemacs.org>"
git config sendemail.from "Your Name <your@@email>"
@end smallexample

With those settings, the commands: @code{git format-patch -o DIR
origin}, and @code{git send-email DIR} are now equivalent of the
original long hairy ones mentioned further up.

Be careful when setting up aliases and config settings that you only
make them global if you absolutely have to.  All the ones I've shown
here have been repo-specific.

@node  Setting up a private repos, Other Developers' Repositories, Setting up a publicly accessible repo, Version Control
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Setting up a private repos
@cindex version control
@cindex repo
@cindex git
@cindex contributions

Git makes it as easy to create a private repos as getting a checkout
of the source code. In fact, all you need to do is to actually
checkout and you have a repos:

@smallexample
  git clone http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs
@end smallexample

You may want to follow some of the steps in @xref{Automating with
Aliases}, to easy your life when sending patches if you plan to
contribute frequently from this repo. Please note that in this case
you should not reference any REPO-URL.

However if you do plan to contribute frequently, we strongly suggest
you configure a publicly accessible repos.

More details at @xref{Setting up a publicly accessible repo}.

@node  Other Developers' Repositories,, Setting up a private repos, Version Control
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Other Developers' Repositories
@cindex version control
@cindex repo
@cindex git
@cindex contributions

As previously mentioned, the master SXEmacs repo is at:
@smallexample
  http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs
@end smallexample
>>>>>>> master

Some of these repos may not be publicly accessible or may not be
accessible 24/7.

@itemize @bullet
<<<<<<< HEAD
@c Sebastian
@item
http://www.math.tu-berlin.de/~freundt/archives/sxemacs/
@c Nelson
@item
http://sxemacs.homeip.net:4080/njsf-arch/sxemacs/2007/
@c Evgeny
@item
http://arch.xwem.org/2006/
@c Norbert
@item
http://arafel.viteno.net:33080/arch/sxemacs/
@c Martin Khl
@item
http://www.informatik.uni-bremen.de/~mkhl/sxemacs-mirror/
@c Alexey Mikhailov (karma)
@item
http://karma.ezunix.org/arch/2005/
=======
Nelson
@item
http://git.nelsonferreira.com/sxemacs
@end itemize

And that is it for now.  We've only just moved to git and the
main SXEmacs developers haven't set up their repos.

@c @itemize @bullet
@c Sebastian
@c @item
@c http://www.math.tu-berlin.de/~freundt/archives/sxemacs/
@c Evgeny
@c @item
@c http://arch.xwem.org/2006/
@c Norbert
@c @item
@c http://arafel.viteno.net:33080/arch/sxemacs/
@c Martin Khl
@c @item
@c http://www.informatik.uni-bremen.de/~mkhl/sxemacs-mirror/
@c Alexey Mikhailov (karma)
@c @item
@c http://karma.ezunix.org/arch/2005/
>>>>>>> master
@c Hynek
@c @item
@c http://hynek.in-berlin.de/archive/
@c Horst Burkhardt (PeanutHorst)
<<<<<<< HEAD
@item
<<<<<<< HEAD
http://midcom.unlogicnetworks.net/oss-vc/
=======
http://midcom.steveyoungs.com/oss-vc/sxemacs/
>>>>>>> origin/master
@c Nick Granado
@c @item
@c http://www.heatxsink.com/2005/
@end itemize

And of course the main repo (Steve's) is at:

http://arch.sxemacs.org/@yy{}/

=======
@c @item
@c http://midcom.steveyoungs.com/oss-vc/sxemacs/
@c Nick Granado
@c @item
@c http://www.heatxsink.com/2005/
@c @end itemize

And of course the main repo (Steve's) is at:

http://git.sxemacs.org/sxemacs
http://git.sxemacs.org/website  (our website is under git too)

@subheading The tla repository for versions upto 22.1.12

The old tla repos at http://arch.sxemacs.org/2010 still exist, and
will remain forever.  If you ever need anything from them just install
@code{tla} and leech them with that.

The reason we are keeping them around indefinitely is because the move
to git meant a loss of history.  There are tools available for
converting a arch repo to git, but they failed to work in our case
because of the cached revisions in our repos.
>>>>>>> master

@node Concept Index,, Version Control, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@bye
