@c This is part of the XEmacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1985, 86, 87, 93, 94, 95, 1997 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file xemacs.texi for copying conditions.
@node Packages, Basic, Startup Paths, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

@section Packages
@cindex packages

The XEmacs 21 distribution comes only with a very basic set of
built-in modes and packages.  Most of the packages that were part of
the distribution of earlier versions of XEmacs are now available
separately.  The installer as well as the user can choose which
packages to install; the actual installation process is easy.
This gives an installer the ability to tailor an XEmacs installation for
local needs with safe removal of unnecessary code.

@menu
* Package Terminology:: Understanding different kinds of packages.
* Installing Packages:: How to install packages.
* Building Packages::   Building packages from CVS sources.
* Local.rules File::    This is an important file that you must create.
* Available Packages::  A brief directory of packaged LISP.
@end menu

@node Package Terminology, Installing Packages, , Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@heading Package Terminology:
@subsection Package Flavors

There are two main flavors of packages.

@itemize @bullet
@item 
Regular Packages
@cindex regular packages
A regular package is one in which multiple files are involved and one
may not in general safely remove any of them.

@item 
Single-File Packages
@cindex single-file packages
A single-file package is an aggregate collection of thematically
related but otherwise independent lisp files.  These files are bundled 
together for download convenience and individual files may be deleted at
will without any loss of functionality.  However, we would recommend
that you follow this rule of thumb: "When in doubt, don't delete".
@end itemize

@subsection Package Distributions
@cindex package distributions
XEmacs Lisp packages are distributed in two ways, depending on the
intended use.  Binary Packages are for installers and end-users that can
be installed directly into an XEmacs package directory.  Source Packages
are for developers and include all files necessary for rebuilding
bytecompiled lisp and creating tarballs for distribution.

@subsection Binary Packages
@cindex binary packages
Binary packages may be installed directly into an XEmacs package
hierarchy.

@subsection Source Packages
@cindex source packages
Source packages contain all of the Package author's (where appropriate
in regular packages) source code plus all of the files necessary to
build distribution tarballs (Unix Tar format files, gzipped for space
savings).

Currently, source packages are only available via CVS.  See
@url{http://cvs.xemacs.org/} for details.

@node Installing Packages, Building Packages, Package Terminology, Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex installing packages
@cindex install
@heading Installing Packages:
@subsection Getting Started

When you first download XEmacs 21, you will usually first grab the
@dfn{core distribution},
@cindex core distribution
a file called
@file{xemacs-21.x.x.tar.gz}. (Replace the @t{21.x.x} by the current version
number.)  The core distribution contains the sources of XEmacs and a
minimal set of Emacs Lisp files, which are in the subdirectory named
@file{lisp}.  This subdirectory used to contain all Emacs Lisp files
distributed with XEmacs.  Now, to conserve disk space, most
non-essential packages were made optional.

@subsection Choosing the Packages You Need
@cindex choosing packages
The @ref{Available Packages} can currently be found in the same ftp directory
where you grabbed the core distribution from, and are located in the
subdirectory @file{packages}.  Package file names follow
the naming convention @file{<package-name>-<version>-pkg.tar.gz}.

If you have EFS @ref{(EFS)}, packages can be installed over the network.
Alternatively, if you have copies of the packages locally, you can
install packages from a local disk or CDROM.

The file @file{etc/PACKAGES} in the core distribution contains a list of
the @ref{Available Packages} at the time of the XEmacs release.

You can also get a list of available packages, and whether or not they
are installed, using the visual package browser and installer.  You can
access it via the menus:

@example
Tools -> Packages -> List and Install
@end example

Or, you can get to it via the keyboard:

@example
@code{M-x pui-list-packages}
@end example

Hint to system administrators of multi-user systems: it might be a good
idea to install all packages and not interfere with the wishes of your
users.

If you can't find which package provides the feature you require, try
using the @code{package-get-package-provider} function. Eg., if you know 
that you need @code{thingatpt}, type:

@example
@code{M-x package-get-package-provider RET thingatpt}
@end example

which will return something like @samp{(fsf-compat "1.08")}. You can the use
one of the methods above for installing the package you want.

@subsection XEmacs and Installing Packages

There are three main ways to install packages:

@menu
* Automatically::     Using the package tools from XEmacs.
* Manually::          Using individual package tarballs.
* Sumo::              All at once, using the 'Sumo Tarball'.
* Which Packages::    Which packages to install.
* Removing Packages:: Removing packages.
@end menu

But regardless of the method you use to install packages, they can only
be used by XEmacs after a restart unless the package in question has not
been previously installed.

@node Automatically, Manually, ,Installing Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex automatic package install
@cindex package tools
@heading Automatic Package Installation:
XEmacs comes with some tools to make the periodic updating and
installing easier. It will notice if new packages or versions are
available and will fetch them from the FTP site.

Unfortunately this requires that a few packages are already in place.
You will have to install them by hand as above or use a SUMO tarball.
This requirement will hopefully go away in the future. The packages
you need are:

@example
   efs          - To fetch the files from the FTP site or mirrors.
   xemacs-base  - Needed by efs.

and optionally:

   mailcrypt    - To do PGP verification of the @file{package-index}
                  file. 
@end example

After installing these by hand, fire up XEmacs and follow these
steps.

@enumerate 1
@item 
Choose a download site.
via menu: Tools -> Packages -> Set Download Site 
via keyb: @code{M-x customize-variable RET package-get-remote RET}
(put in the details of remote host and directory)

If the package tarballs _AND_ the package-index file are in a
local directory, you can: @code{M-x pui-set-local-package-get-directory RET}

@item 
Obtain a list of packages and display the list in a buffer named
@file{*Packages*}.
menu: Tools -> Packages -> List & Install
keyb: @code{M-x pui-list-packages RET}

XEmacs will now connect to the remote site and download the
latest package-index file.

The visual package browser will then display a list of all packages.
Help information will be displayed at the very bottom of the buffer; you
may have to scroll down to see it.  You can also press @kbd{?} to get
the same help.  From this buffer, you can tell the package status by the
character in the first column:

@table @kbd
@item -
The package has not been installed.
@item *
The package has been installed, but a newer version is available.  The
current version is out-of-date.
@item +
The package has been marked for installation/update.
@end table

If there is no character in the first column, the package has been
installed and is up to date.

From here, you can select or unselect packages for installation using
the @key{RET} key, the @kbd{Mouse-2} button or selecting "Select" from
the Popup @kbd{Mouse-3} Menu.
Once you've finished selecting the packages, you can
press the @kbd{x} key (or use the menu) to actually install the
packages. Note that you will have to restart XEmacs for XEmacs to
recognize any new packages.

Key summary:

@table @kbd
@item ?
Display simple help.
@item @key{RET}
@itemx @key{Mouse-2}
Toggle between selecting and unselecting a package for installation.
@item x
Install selected packages.
@item @key{SPC}
View, in the minibuffer, additional information about the package, such
as the package date (not the build date) and the package author.  Moving 
the mouse over a package name will also do the same thing.
@item v
Toggle between verbose and non-verbose package display.
@item g
Refresh the package display.
@item q
Kill the package buffer.
@end table

Moving the mouse over a package will also cause additional information
about the package to be displayed in the minibuffer.  If you have
balloon-help enabled a balloon-help frame will pop up and display
additional package information also.


@item 
Choose the packages you wish to install.
mouse: Click button 2 on the package name.
 keyb: @kbd{RET} on the package name

@item 
Make sure you have everything you need.
menu: Packages -> Add Required
keyb: @kbd{r}

XEmacs will now search for packages that are required by the
ones that you have chosen to install and offer to select
those packages also.

For novices and gurus alike, this step can save your bacon.
It's easy to forget to install a critical package.

@item 
Download and install the packages.
menu: Packages -> Install/Remove Selected
keyb: @kbd{x}
@end enumerate

You can also install packages using a semi-manual interface:

@example
M-x package-get-all <return>
@end example

Enter the name of the package (e.g., @code{prog-modes}), and XEmacs
will search for the latest version and install it and any packages that
it depends upon.

@heading Keeping Packages Up To Date:
Once you have the packages you want installed (using any of the above
methods) you'll want to keep them up to date.  You can do this easily
from the menubar:

@example
Tools -> Packages -> Set Download Site
Tools -> Packages -> Update Installed Packages
@end example


@node Manually, Sumo, Automatically, Installing Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex manual package install
@heading Manual Package Installation:
Fetch the packages from the FTP site, CD-ROM whatever. The filenames
have the form @file{name-<version>-pkg.tar.gz} and are gzipped tar files. For
a fresh install it is sufficient to untar the file at the top of the
package hierarchy. 

Note: If you are upgrading packages already installed, it's best to
remove the old package first @ref{Removing Packages}.

For example if we are installing the @file{xemacs-base}
package (version 1.48):

@example
   mkdir $prefix/lib/xemacs/xemacs-packages RET # if it does not exist yet
   cd $prefix/lib/xemacs/xemacs-packages RET
   gunzip -c /path/to/xemacs-base-1.48-pkg.tar.gz | tar xvf - RET

Or if you have GNU tar, the last step can be:

   tar zxvf /path/to/xemacs-base-1.48-pkg.tar.gz RET
@end example

For MULE related packages, it is best to untar into the mule-packages
hierarchy, i.e. for the @file{mule-base} package, version 1.37:

@example
   mkdir $prefix/lib/xemacs/mule-packages RET # if it does not exist yet
   cd $prefix/lib/xemacs/mule-packages RET
   gunzip -c /path/to/mule-base-1.37-pkg.tar.gz | tar xvf - RET

Or if you have GNU tar, the last step can be:

   tar zxvf /path/to/mule-base-1.37-pkg.tar.gz RET
@end example

@node Sumo, Which Packages, Manually, Installing Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex sumo package install
@heading Installing the Sumo Packages:
Those with little time, cheap connections and plenty of disk space can
install all the packages at once using the sumo tarballs.
Download the file: @file{xemacs-sumo.tar.gz}

For an XEmacs compiled with Mule you also need: @file{xemacs-mule-sumo.tar.gz}

N.B. They are called 'Sumo Tarballs' for good reason. They are
currently about 19MB and 4.5MB (gzipped) respectively.

Install them by:

@code{cd $prefix/lib/xemacs ; gunzip -c <tarballname> | tar xvf - RET}

Or, if you have GNU tar:

@code{cd $prefix/lib/xemacs ; tar zxvf /path/to/<tarballname> RET}

As the Sumo tarballs are not regenerated as often as the individual
packages, it is recommended that you use the automatic package tools
afterwards to pick up any recent updates.

@node Which Packages, Removing Packages, Sumo, Installing Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex which packages
@cindex choosing packages
@heading Which Packages to Install:
This is difficult to say. When in doubt install a package. If you
administrate a big site it might be a good idea to just install
everything. A good minimal set of packages for XEmacs-latin1 would be

xemacs-base, xemacs-devel, c-support, cc-mode, debug, dired, efs,
edit-utils, fsf-compat, mail-lib, net-utils, os-utils, prog-modes,
text-modes, time, mailcrypt

If you are using the XEmacs package tools, don't forget to do:

	Packages -> Add Required

To make sure you have everything that the packages you have chosen to
install need.

See also @ref{Available Packages} for further descriptions of the individual
packages.

@node Removing Packages, ,Which Packages, Installing Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex removing packages
@cindex deleting packages
@heading Removing Packages:
Because the exact files and their locations contained in a package may
change it is recommended to remove a package first before installing a
new version. In order to facilitate removal each package contains an
@file{pgkinfo/MANIFEST.pkgname} file which list all the files belonging
to the package. 

No need to panic, you don't have to go through the
@file{pkinfo/MANIFEST.pkgname} and manually delete the files.  Instead, use
@code{M-x package-get-delete-package RET}.

Note that the interactive package tools included with XEmacs already do
this for you.

@node Building Packages, Local.rules File, Installing Packages, Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex building packages
@cindex package building
@heading Building Packages:
Currently, source packages are only available via anonymous CVS.  See
@url{http://cvs.xemacs.org/} for details of checking out the
@file{xemacs-packages} module.

@subsection Prerequisites for Building Source Packages

@table @code
@item GNU cp
@item GNU install 
(or a BSD compatible install program).
@item GNU make 
(3.75 or later preferred).
@item makeinfo 
(4.2 from GNU texinfo 4.2 or later required).
@item GNU tar
(or equivalent).
@item GNU gzip
(or equivalent).
@item A properly configured @file{Local.rules} file.
@ref{Local.rules File}.
@end table
And of course, XEmacs 21.0 or higher.

@subsection What You Can Do With Source Packages

The packages CVS sources are most useful for creating XEmacs package
tarballs for installation into your own XEmacs installations or for
distributing to others.

For a list and description of the different @file{Makefile} targets,
@xref{Makefile Targets,,,lispref}.

@node Local.rules File, Available Packages, Building Packages, Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex local.rules
@heading The Local.rules File:
This file is used when building and installing packages from source.  In
the top level of the CVS module, @file{packages}, contains the
file, @file{Local.rules.template}.  Simply copy that to
@file{Local.rules} and edit it to suit your needs.

For a complete discussion of the @file{Local.rules} file,
@xref{Local.rules File,,,lispref}.

@node Available Packages,  , Local.rules File, Packages
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@cindex available packages
@cindex packages
@heading Available Packages:
This section lists the Lisp packages that are currently available from
xemacs.org and it's mirrors.  If a particular package that you are
looking for isn't here, please send a message to the
@email{xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org, XEmacs Beta list}.

This data is up to date as of June 27, 2003.

@subsection Normal Packages
A very broad selection of elisp packages.

@table @file
@item Sun
Support for Sparcworks.

@item ada
Ada language support.

@item apel
A Portable Emacs Library.  Used by XEmacs MIME support.

@item auctex
Basic TeX/LaTeX support.

@item bbdb
The Big Brother Data Base: a rolodex-like database program.

@item build
Build XEmacs using custom widgets.

@item c-support
Basic single-file add-ons for editing C code.

@item calc
Emacs calculator.

@item calendar
Calendar and diary support.

@item cc-mode
C, C++ and Java language support.

@item clearcase
Support for the Clearcase version control system.

@item cookie
"Fortune cookie"-style messages. Includes Spook (suspicious phrases) 
and Yow (Zippy quotes).

@item crisp
Crisp/Brief emulation.

@item debug
GUD, gdb, dbx debugging support.

@item dictionary
Interface to RFC2229 dictionary servers.

@item dired
The DIRectory EDitor is for manipulating, and running commands on
files in a directory.

@item docbookide
DocBook editing support.

@item ecrypto
Crypto functionality in Emacs Lisp.

@item edebug
A Lisp debugger.

@item ediff
Interface over patch.

@item edit-utils
Single file lisp packages for various XEmacs goodies.  Load this and
weed out the junk you don't want.

@item edt
DEC EDIT/EDT emulation.

@item efs
Treat files on remote systems the same as local files.

@item eieio
Enhanced Implementation of Emacs Interpreted Objects.

@item elib
Portable Emacs Lisp utilities library.

@item emerge
Another interface over patch.

@item eshell
Command shell implemented entirely in Emacs Lisp.

@item ess
ESS: Emacs Speaks Statistics.

@item eterm
Terminal emulator.

@item eudc
Emacs Unified Directory Client (LDAP, PH).

@item footnote
Footnoting in mail message editing modes.

@item forms
Forms editing support (obsolete, use the built-in Widget instead).

@item fortran-modes
Fortran language support.

@item frame-icon
Provide a WM icon based on major mode.

@item fsf-compat
GNU Emacs compatibility files.

@item games
Tetris, Sokoban, and Snake.

@item general-docs
General documentation.  Presently, empty.

@item gnats
XEmacs bug reports.

@item gnus
The Gnus Newsreader and Mailreader.

@item haskell-mode
Haskell language support.

@item hm--html-menus
HTML editing.

@item ibuffer
Advanced replacement for buffer-menu.

@item idlwave
Editing and Shell mode for the Interactive Data Language.

@item igrep
Enhanced front-end for Grep.

@item ilisp
Front-end for interacting with Inferior Lisp (external lisps).

@item ispell
Spell-checking with ispell.

@item jde
Java language and development support.

@item liece
IRC (Internet Relay Chat) client for Emacs.

@item mail-lib
Fundamental lisp files for providing email support.

@item mailcrypt
Support for messaging encryption with PGP.

@item mew
Messaging in an Emacs World; a MIME-based email program.

@item mh-e
Front end support for MH.

@item mine
Elisp implementation of the game 'Minehunt'.

@item misc-games
Other amusements and diversions.

@item mmm-mode
Support for Multiple Major Modes within a single buffer.

@item net-utils
Miscellaneous Networking Utilities.  This is a single-file package and 
files may be deleted at will.

@item ocaml
Objective Caml editing support.

@item os-utils
Miscellaneous single-file O/S utilities, for printing, archiving,
compression, remote shells, etc.

@item pc
PC style interface emulation.

@item pcl-cvs
CVS frontend.

@item pcomplete
Provides programmatic completion.

@item perl-modes
Perl language support.

@item pgg
Emacs interface to various PGP implementations.

@item prog-modes
Miscellaneous single-file lisp files for various programming languages.

@item ps-print
Print buffers to PostScript printers.

@item psgml
Validated HTML/SGML editing.

@item psgml-dtds
A collection of DTDs for psgml.  Note that this package is deprecated
and will be removed in the future, most likely Q2/2003.  Instead of using
this, you should install needed DTDs yourself.

@item python-modes
Python language support.

@item reftex
Emacs support for LaTeX cross-references, citations.

@item rmail
An obsolete Emacs mailer.  If you do not already use it don't start.

@item ruby-modes
Ruby language support.

@item sasl
Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL) library.

@item scheme
Front-end support for Inferior Scheme.

@item semantic
Semantic bovinator.

@item sgml
SGML/Linuxdoc-SGML editing.

@item sh-script
Support for editing shell scripts.

@item sieve
Manage Sieve email filtering scripts.

@item slider
User interface tool.

@item sml-mode
Standard ML editing support.

@item sounds-au
XEmacs Sun sound files.

@item sounds-wav
XEmacs Microsoft sound files.

@item speedbar
Provides a separate frame with convenient references.

@item strokes
Mouse enhancement utility.

@item supercite
An Emacs citation tool.  Useful with all Emacs Mailers and Newsreaders.

@item texinfo
XEmacs TeXinfo support.

@item text-modes
Various single file lisp packages for editing text files.

@item textools
Single-file TeX support.

@item time
Display time & date on the modeline.

@item tm
Emacs MIME support. Not needed for Gnus >= 5.8.0

@item tooltalk
Support for building with Tooltalk.

@item tpu
DEC EDIT/TPU support.

@item tramp
Remote shell-based file editing.  This is similar to EFS or Ange-FTP,
but works with rsh/ssh and rcp/scp.

@item vc
Version Control for Free systems.

@item vc-cc
Version Control for ClearCase.  This package will shortly be
replaced with clearcase.el

@item vhdl
Support for VHDL.

@item view-process
A Unix process browsing tool.

@item viper
VI emulation support.

@item vm
An Emacs mailer.

@item w3
A Web browser.

@item x-symbol
Semi WYSIWYG for LaTeX, HTML, etc, using additional fonts.

@item xemacs-base
Fundamental XEmacs support.  Install this unless you wish a totally
naked XEmacs.

@item xemacs-devel
XEmacs Lisp developer support.  This package contains utilities for
supporting Lisp development.  It is a single-file package so it may be 
tailored.

@item xslide
XSL editing support.

@item xslt-process
A minor mode for (X)Emacs which allows running an XSLT processor on a
buffer.

@item zenirc
ZENIRC IRC Client.
@end table

@subsection Mule Support (mule)

MULti-lingual Enhancement.  Support for world scripts such as
Latin, Arabic, Cyrillic, Chinese, Japanese, Greek, Hebrew etc.
To use these packages your XEmacs must be compiled with Mule
support.

@table @file
@item edict
Lisp Interface to EDICT, Kanji Dictionary.

@item egg-its
Wnn (4.2 and 6) support.  SJ3 support.  Must be installed prior to
XEmacs build.

@item latin-unity
Unify character sets in a buffer. When characters belong to disjoint
character sets, this attempts to translate the characters so
that they belong to one character set. If the buffer coding system is
not sufficient, this suggests different coding systems.

@item leim
Quail.  Used for everything other than English and Japanese.

@item locale
Used for localized menubars (French and Japanese) and localized splash
screens (Japanese).

@item lookup
Dictionary support. (This isn't an English dictionary program)

@item mule-base
Basic Mule support.  Must be installed prior to building with Mule.

@item mule-ucs
Extended coding systems (including Unicode) for XEmacs.

@item skk
Another Japanese Language Input Method.  Can be used without a
separate process running as a dictionary server.
@end table

