\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../../info/xemacs.info
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up


@ifinfo
@dircategory XEmacs Editor
@direntry
* XEmacs: (xemacs).		XEmacs Editor.
@end direntry

This file documents the XEmacs editor.

Copyright (C) 1985, 1986, 1988 Richard M. Stallman.
Copyright @copyright{} 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 Lucid, Inc.
Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Copyright @copyright{} 1995 Amdahl Corporation.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
sections entitled ``The GNU Manifesto'', ``Distribution'' and ``GNU
General Public License'' are included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the sections entitled ``The GNU Manifesto'',
``Distribution'' and ``GNU General Public License'' may be included in a
translation approved by the author instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo
@c
@setchapternewpage odd
@settitle XEmacs User's Manual
@c
@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{XEmacs User's Manual}
@sp 4
@sp 1
@sp 1
@center July 1994
@center (General Public License upgraded, January 1991)
@sp 5
@center Richard Stallman
@sp 1
@center Lucid, Inc.
@sp 1
@center and
@sp 1
@center Ben Wing
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1985, 1986, 1988 Richard M. Stallman.

Copyright @copyright{} 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994  Lucid, Inc.

Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994 Sun Microsystems, Inc.

Copyright @copyright{} 1995 Amdahl Corporation.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
sections entitled ``The GNU Manifesto'', ``Distribution'' and ``GNU
General Public License'' are included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the sections entitled ``The GNU Manifesto'',
``Distribution'' and ``GNU General Public License'' may be included in a
translation approved by the author instead of in the original English.
@end titlepage
@page
@ifinfo
@node Top, License,, (dir)
@top The XEmacs Editor


XEmacs is the extensible, customizable, self-documenting real-time
display editor.  This Info file describes how to edit with Emacs
and some of how to customize it, but not how to extend it.  It
corresponds to XEmacs version 21.0.

This manual is intended as a detailed reference to XEmacs.  If
you are looking for an introductory manual, see the New User's
Guide.

@end ifinfo
@menu
* License::     The GNU General Public License gives you permission
		to redistribute XEmacs on certain terms; and also
		explains that there is no warranty.
* Distrib::     How to get XEmacs.
* Intro::       An introduction to XEmacs concepts.
* Glossary::    The glossary.
* Manifesto::   What's GNU?  Gnu's Not Unix!

Indices, nodes containing large menus
* Key Index::      An item for each standard XEmacs key sequence.
* Command Index::  An item for each command name.
* Variable Index:: An item for each documented variable.
* Concept Index::  An item for each concept.

Important General Concepts
* Frame::      How to interpret what you see on the screen.
* Keystrokes::  Keyboard gestures XEmacs recognizes.
* Pull-down Menus:: 
                The XEmacs Pull-down Menus available under X.
* Entering Emacs::    
                Starting Emacs from the shell.
* Exiting::     Stopping or killing XEmacs.
* Command Switches::  
                Hairy startup options.
* Startup Paths::
                How XEmacs finds Directories and Files.
* Packages::    How XEmacs organizes its high-level functionality.

Fundamental Editing Commands
* Basic::       The most basic editing commands.
* Undo::        Undoing recently made changes in the text.
* Minibuffer::  Entering arguments that are prompted for.
* M-x::         Invoking commands by their names.
* Help::        Commands for asking XEmacs about its commands.

Important Text-Changing Commands
* Mark::        The mark: how to delimit a ``region'' of text.
* Mouse Selection:: 
                Selecting text with the mouse.
* Additional Mouse Operations::
                Other operations available from the mouse.
* Killing::     Killing text.
* Yanking::     Recovering killed text.  Moving text.
* Using X Selections::
                Using primary selection, cut buffers, and highlighted regions.
* Accumulating Text::
                Other ways of copying text.
* Rectangles::  Operating on the text inside a rectangle on the screen.
* Registers::   Saving a text string or a location in the buffer.
* Display::     Controlling what text is displayed.
* Search::      Finding or replacing occurrences of a string.
* Fixit::       Commands especially useful for fixing typos.

Larger Units of Text
* Files::       All about handling files.
* Buffers::     Multiple buffers; editing several files at once.
* Windows::     Viewing two pieces of text at once.
* Mule::	Using world scripts.

Advanced Features
* Major Modes:: Text mode vs. Lisp mode vs. C mode ...
* Indentation:: Editing the white space at the beginnings of lines.
* Text::        Commands and modes for editing English.
* Programs::    Commands and modes for editing programs.
* Running::     Compiling, running and debugging programs.
* Abbrevs::     How to define text abbreviations to reduce
                 the number of characters you must type.
* Picture::     Editing pictures made up of characters
                 using the quarter-plane screen model.
* Sending Mail:: Sending mail in XEmacs.
* Reading Mail:: Reading mail in XEmacs.
* Calendar/Diary:: A Calendar and diary facility in XEmacs.
* Sorting::	Sorting lines, paragraphs or pages within XEmacs.
* Shell::       Executing shell commands from XEmacs.
* Narrowing::   Restricting display and editing to a portion
                 of the buffer.
* Hardcopy::	Printing buffers or regions.
* Recursive Edit::
                A command can allow you to do editing
                 "within the command".  This is called a
                 `recursive editing level'.
* Dissociated Press::  Dissociating text for fun.
* CONX::	       A different kind of dissociation.
* Amusements::         Various games and hacks.
* Emulation::	       Emulating some other editors with XEmacs.
* Customization::      Modifying the behavior of XEmacs.

Recovery from Problems.
* Quitting::    Quitting and aborting.
* Lossage::     What to do if XEmacs is hung or malfunctioning.
* Bugs::        How and when to report a bug.

Here are some other nodes which are really inferiors of the ones
already listed, mentioned here so you can get to them in one step:

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

The Organization of the Frame

* Point::	        The place in the text where editing commands operate.  
* Echo Area::           Short messages appear at the bottom of the frame.  
* Mode Line::	        Interpreting the mode line.  
* XEmacs under X::      Some information on using XEmacs under the X 
                        Window System. 

Keystrokes

* Intro to Keystrokes::      Keystrokes as building blocks of key sequences.
* Representing Keystrokes::  Using lists of modifiers and keysyms to
                             represent keystrokes.
* Key Sequences::            Combine key strokes into key sequences you can
                             bind to commands.
* String Key Sequences::     Available for upward compatibility.
* Meta Key::                 Using @key{ESC} to represent @key{Meta}
* Super and Hyper Keys::     Adding modifier keys on certain keyboards.
* Character Representation:: How characters appear in XEmacs buffers.
* Commands::                 How commands are bound to key sequences.
                    
Pull-down Menus

* File Menu::           Items on the File menu.
* Edit Menu::           Items on the Edit menu.
* Apps Menu::		Items on the Apps menu.
* Options Menu::        Items on the Options menu. 
* Buffers Menu::        Information about the Buffers menu.
* Tools Menu::		Items on the Tools menu.
* Help Menu::           Items on the Help menu. 
* Menu Customization::  Adding and removing menu items and related
                        operations.

Packages

* Packages::            Introduction to XEmacs Packages.
* Package Terminology:: Understanding different kinds of packages.
* Installing Packages:: How to install packages.
* Building Packages::   Building packages from sources.
* Local.rules File::    An important part of building packages.
* Available Packages::  A brief directory of packaged LISP.

Basic Editing Commands

* Blank Lines::        Commands to make or delete blank lines.
* Continuation Lines:: Lines too wide for the frame.
* Position Info::      What page, line, row, or column is point on?
* Arguments::	       Numeric arguments for repeating a command.

The Minibuffer

* File: Minibuffer File.  Entering file names with the minibuffer.
* Edit: Minibuffer Edit.  How to edit in the minibuffer.
* Completion::		  An abbreviation facility for minibuffer input.
* Repetition::		  Re-executing commands that used the minibuffer.

The Mark and the Region

* Setting Mark::	Commands to set the mark.
* Using Region::	Summary of ways to operate on contents of the region.
* Marking Objects::	Commands to put region around textual units.
* Mark Ring::   	Previous mark positions saved so you can go back there.

Yanking

* Kill Ring::       Where killed text is stored.  Basic yanking.
* Appending Kills:: Several kills in a row all yank together.
* Earlier Kills::   Yanking something killed some time ago.

Using X Selections

* X Clipboard Selection::     	Pasting to the X clipboard.
* X Selection Commands::	Other operations on the selection.
* X Cut Buffers::       	X cut buffers are available for compatibility.
* Active Regions::      	Using zmacs-style highlighting of the
                        	 selected region.

Registers

* Position: RegPos.           Saving positions in registers.
* Text: RegText.              Saving text in registers.
* Rectangle: RegRect.         Saving rectangles in registers.
* Configurations: RegConfig.  Saving window configurations in registers.
* Files: RegFiles.            File names in registers.
* Numbers: RegNumbers.        Numbers in registers.
* Bookmarks::                 Bookmarks are like registers, but persistent.

Controlling the Display

* Scrolling::	           Moving text up and down in a window.
* Horizontal Scrolling::   Moving text left and right in a window.
* Selective Display::      Hiding lines with lots of indentation.
* Display Vars::           Information on variables for customizing display.

Searching and Replacement

* Incremental Search::     Search happens as you type the string.
* Non-Incremental Search:: Specify entire string and then search.
* Word Search::            Search for sequence of words.
* Regexp Search::          Search for match for a regexp.
* Regexps::                Syntax of regular expressions.
* Search Case::            To ignore case while searching, or not.
* Replace::                Search, and replace some or all matches.
* Other Repeating Search:: Operating on all matches for some regexp.

Replacement Commands

* Unconditional Replace::  Replacing all matches for a string.
* Regexp Replace::         Replacing all matches for a regexp.
* Replacement and Case::   How replacements preserve case of letters.
* Query Replace::          How to use querying.

Commands for Fixing Typos

* Kill Errors:: Commands to kill a batch of recently entered text.
* Transpose::   Exchanging two characters, words, lines, lists...
* Fixing Case:: Correcting case of last word entered.
* Spelling::    Apply spelling checker to a word, or a whole file.

File Handling

* File Names::       How to type and edit file name arguments.
* Visiting::         Visiting a file prepares XEmacs to edit the file.
* Saving::           Saving makes your changes permanent.
* Reverting::        Reverting cancels all the changes not saved.
* Auto Save::        Auto Save periodically protects against loss of data.
* Version Control::  Version control systems (RCS and SCCS).
* ListDir::          Listing the contents of a file directory.
* Comparing Files::  Finding where two files differ.
* Dired::            ``Editing'' a directory to delete, rename, etc.
                     the files in it.
* Misc File Ops::    Other things you can do on files.

Saving Files

* Backup::       How XEmacs saves the old version of your file.
* Interlocking:: How XEmacs protects against simultaneous editing
                  of one file by two users.

Backup Files

* Names: Backup Names.		How backup files are named;
				Choosing single or numbered backup files.
* Deletion: Backup Deletion.	XEmacs deletes excess numbered backups.
* Copying: Backup Copying.	Backups can be made by copying or renaming.

Auto-Saving: Protection Against Disasters

* Files: Auto Save Files.
* Control: Auto Save Control.
* Recover::		Recovering text from auto-save files.

Version Control

* Concepts of VC::		Basic version control information;
				  checking files in and out.
* Editing with VC::		Commands for editing a file maintained
				  with version control.
* Variables for Check-in/out::	Variables that affect the commands used
				  to check files in or out.
* Log Entries::			Logging your changes.
* Change Logs and VC::		Generating a change log file from log
				  entries. 
* Old Versions::		Examining and comparing old versions.
* VC Status::			Commands to view the VC status of files and
				  look at log entries.
* Renaming and VC::		A command to rename both the source and
				  master file correctly.
* Snapshots::			How to make and use snapshots, a set of
				  file versions that can be treated as a unit.
* Version Headers::		Inserting version control headers into
				  working files.

Snapshots

* Making Snapshots::		The snapshot facilities.
* Snapshot Caveats::		Things to be careful of when using snapshots.

Dired, the Directory Editor

* Enter: Dired Enter.         How to invoke Dired.
* Edit: Dired Edit.           Editing the Dired buffer.
* Deletion: Dired Deletion.   Deleting files with Dired.
* Immed: Dired Immed.         Other file operations through Dired.

Using Multiple Buffers

* Select Buffer::   Creating a new buffer or reselecting an old one.
* List Buffers::    Getting a list of buffers that exist.
* Misc Buffer::     Renaming; changing read-onliness; copying text.
* Kill Buffer::     Killing buffers you no longer need.
* Several Buffers:: How to go through the list of all buffers
                     and operate variously on several of them.

Multiple Windows

* Basic Window::     Introduction to XEmacs windows.
* Split Window::     New windows are made by splitting existing windows.
* Other Window::     Moving to another window or doing something to it.
* Pop Up Window::    Finding a file or buffer in another window.
* Change Window::    Deleting windows and changing their sizes.

Major Modes

* Choosing Modes::     How major modes are specified or chosen.

Indentation

* Indentation Commands:: Various commands and techniques for indentation.
* Tab Stops::            You can set arbitrary "tab stops" and then
                         indent to the next tab stop when you want to.
* Just Spaces::          You can request indentation using just spaces.

Commands for Human Languages

* Text Mode::   The major modes for editing text files.
* Nroff Mode::  The major mode for editing input to the formatter nroff.
* TeX Mode::    The major modes for editing input to the formatter TeX.
* Outline Mode:: The major mode for editing outlines.
* Words::       Moving over and killing words.
* Sentences::   Moving over and killing sentences.
* Paragraphs::	Moving over paragraphs.
* Pages::	Moving over pages.
* Filling::     Filling or justifying text
* Case::        Changing the case of text

@TeX{} Mode

* Editing: TeX Editing.   Special commands for editing in TeX mode.
* Printing: TeX Print.    Commands for printing part of a file with TeX.

Outline Mode

* Format: Outline Format.	  What the text of an outline looks like.
* Motion: Outline Motion.	  Special commands for moving through outlines.
* Visibility: Outline Visibility. Commands to control what is visible.

Filling Text

* Auto Fill::	  Auto Fill mode breaks long lines automatically.
* Fill Commands:: Commands to refill paragraphs and center lines.
* Fill Prefix::   Filling when every line is indented or in a comment, etc.

Editing Programs

* Program Modes::       Major modes for editing programs.
* Lists::               Expressions with balanced parentheses.
                         There are editing commands to operate on them.
* Defuns::              Each program is made up of separate functions.
                         There are editing commands to operate on them.
* Grinding::            Adjusting indentation to show the nesting.
* Matching::            Insertion of a close-delimiter flashes matching open.
* Comments::            Inserting, filling and aligning comments.
* Balanced Editing::    Inserting two matching parentheses at once, etc.
* Lisp Completion::     Completion on symbol names in Lisp code.
* Documentation::       Getting documentation of functions you plan to call.
* Change Log::          Maintaining a change history for your program.
* Tags::                Go directly to any function in your program in one
                         command.  Tags remembers which file it is in.
* CC Mode::             Modes for C, C++, Java and similar languages
* Fortran::		Fortran mode and its special features.
* Asm Mode::            Asm mode and its special features.

Indentation for Programs

* Basic Indent::
* Multi-line Indent::   Commands to reindent many lines at once.
* Lisp Indent::		Specifying how each Lisp function should be indented.

Tags Tables

* Tag Syntax::		Tag syntax for various types of code and text files.  
* Create Tags Table::	Creating a tags table with @code{etags}.
* Select Tags Table::	How to visit a tags table.
* Find Tag::		Commands to find the definition of a specific tag. 
* Tags Search::		Using a tags table for searching and replacing.
* List Tags::		Listing and finding tags defined in a file.

Fortran Mode

* Motion: Fortran Motion.     Moving point by statements or subprograms.
* Indent: Fortran Indent.     Indentation commands for Fortran.
* Comments: Fortran Comments. Inserting and aligning comments.
* Columns: Fortran Columns.   Measuring columns for valid Fortran.
* Abbrev: Fortran Abbrev.     Built-in abbrevs for Fortran keywords.

Fortran Indentation

* Commands: ForIndent Commands. Commands for indenting Fortran.
* Numbers:  ForIndent Num.      How line numbers auto-indent.
* Conv:     ForIndent Conv.     Conventions you must obey to avoid trouble.
* Vars:     ForIndent Vars.     Variables controlling Fortran indent style.

Compiling and Testing Programs

* Compilation::        Compiling programs in languages other than Lisp
                        (C, Pascal, etc.)
* Modes: Lisp Modes.   Various modes for editing Lisp programs, with
                       different facilities for running the Lisp programs.
* Libraries: Lisp Libraries.      Creating Lisp programs to run in XEmacs.
* Eval: Lisp Eval.     Executing a single Lisp expression in XEmacs.
* Debug: Lisp Debug.   Debugging Lisp programs running in XEmacs.
* Interaction: Lisp Interaction.  Executing Lisp in an XEmacs buffer.
* External Lisp::      Communicating through XEmacs with a separate Lisp.

Lisp Libraries

* Loading::		Loading libraries of Lisp code into XEmacs for use.
* Compiling Libraries:: Compiling a library makes it load and run faster.
* Mocklisp::		Converting Mocklisp to Lisp so XEmacs can run it.

Abbrevs

* Defining Abbrevs::  Defining an abbrev, so it will expand when typed.
* Expanding Abbrevs:: Controlling expansion: prefixes, canceling expansion.
* Editing Abbrevs::   Viewing or editing the entire list of defined abbrevs.
* Saving Abbrevs::    Saving the entire list of abbrevs for another session.
* Dynamic Abbrevs::   Abbreviations for words already in the buffer.

Editing Pictures

* Basic Picture::         Basic concepts and simple commands of Picture Mode.
* Insert in Picture::     Controlling direction of cursor motion
                           after "self-inserting" characters.
* Tabs in Picture::       Various features for tab stops and indentation.
* Rectangles in Picture:: Clearing and superimposing rectangles.

Sending Mail

* Format: Mail Format.    Format of the mail being composed.
* Headers: Mail Headers.  Details of allowed mail header fields.
* Mode: Mail Mode.        Special commands for editing mail being composed.

Running Shell Commands from XEmacs

* Single Shell::         How to run one shell command and return.
* Interactive Shell::    Permanent shell taking input via XEmacs.
* Shell Mode::           Special XEmacs commands used with permanent shell.

Customization

* Minor Modes::     Each minor mode is one feature you can turn on
                     independently of any others.
* Variables::       Many XEmacs commands examine XEmacs variables
                     to decide what to do; by setting variables,
                     you can control their functioning.
* Keyboard Macros:: A keyboard macro records a sequence of keystrokes
                     to be replayed with a single command.
* Key Bindings::    The keymaps say what command each key runs.
                     By changing them, you can "redefine keys".
* Syntax::          The syntax table controls how words and expressions
                     are parsed.
* Init File::       How to write common customizations in the init file.
* Audible Bell::    Changing how XEmacs sounds the bell. 
* Faces::           Changing the fonts and colors of a region of text. 
* X Resources::	    X resources controlling various aspects of the
                     behavior of XEmacs.

Variables

* Examining::           Examining or setting one variable's value.
* Easy Customization::  Convenient and easy customization of variables.
* Edit Options::        Examining or editing list of all variables' values.
* Locals::              Per-buffer values of variables.
* File Variables::      How files can specify variable values.

Keyboard Macros

* Basic Kbd Macro::     Defining and running keyboard macros.
* Save Kbd Macro::      Giving keyboard macros names; saving them in files.
* Kbd Macro Query::     Keyboard macros that do different things each use.

Customizing Key Bindings

* Keymaps::    Definition of the keymap data structure.
               Names of XEmacs's standard keymaps.
* Rebinding::  How to redefine one key's meaning conveniently.
* Disabling::  Disabling a command means confirmation is required
                before it can be executed.  This is done to protect
                beginners from surprises.

The Syntax Table

* Entry: Syntax Entry.    What the syntax table records for each character.
* Change: Syntax Change.  How to change the information.

The Init File

* Init Syntax::     Syntax of constants in Emacs Lisp.
* Init Examples::   How to do some things with an init file.
* Terminal Init::   Each terminal type can have an init file.

Dealing with XEmacs Trouble

* Stuck Recursive::    `[...]' in mode line around the parentheses.
* Screen Garbled::     Garbage on the screen.
* Text Garbled::       Garbage in the text.
* Unasked-for Search:: Spontaneous entry to incremental search.
* Emergency Escape::   Emergency escape---
                        What to do if XEmacs stops responding.
* Total Frustration::  When you are at your wits' end.

@end menu

@iftex
@unnumbered Preface

  This manual documents the use and simple customization of the XEmacs
editor.  The reader is not expected to be a programmer to use this
editor, and simple customizations do not require programming skills either.
Users who are not interested in customizing XEmacs can ignore the scattered
customization hints.

  This document is primarily a reference manual, but it can also be used as a
primer.  However, if you are new to XEmacs, consider using the on-line,
learn-by-doing tutorial, which you get by running XEmacs and typing
@kbd{C-h t}.  With it, you learn XEmacs by using XEmacs on a specially
designed file which describes commands, tells you when to try them,
and then explains the results you see.  Using the tutorial gives a more vivid
introduction than the printed manual.  Also consider reading the XEmacs
New User's Guide, which is intended specifically as an introductory
manual rather than as a reference guide.

  On first reading, just skim chapters one and two, which describe the
notational conventions of the manual and the general appearance of the
XEmacs display frame.  Note which questions are answered in these chapters,
so you can refer back later.  After reading chapter four you should
practice the commands there.  The next few chapters describe fundamental
techniques and concepts that are used constantly.  You need to understand
them thoroughly, experimenting with them if necessary.

  To find the documentation on a particular command, look in the index.
Keys (character commands) and command names have separate indexes.  There
is also a glossary, with a cross reference for each term.

@ignore
  If you know vaguely what the command
does, look in the command summary.  The command summary contains a line or
two about each command, and a cross reference to the section of the
manual that describes the command in more detail; related commands
are grouped together.
@end ignore

  This manual comes in two forms: the published form and the Info form.
The Info form is for on-line perusal with the INFO program; it is
distributed along with XEmacs.  Both forms contain substantially the
same text and are generated from a common source file, which is also
distributed along with XEmacs.

  XEmacs is a member of the Emacs editor family.  There are many Emacs
editors, all sharing common principles of organization.  For information on
the underlying philosophy of Emacs and the lessons learned from its
development, write for a copy of AI memo 519a, ``Emacs, the Extensible,
Customizable Self-Documenting Display Editor'', to Publications Department,
Artificial Intelligence Lab, 545 Tech Square, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.  At
last report they charge $2.25 per copy.  Another useful publication is LCS
TM-165, ``A Cookbook for an Emacs'', by Craig Finseth, available from
Publications Department, Laboratory for Computer Science, 545 Tech Square,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.  The price today is $3.

This manual is for XEmacs installed on UNIX systems.  XEmacs also
exists on Microsoft Windows and Windows NT as Win-Emacs (which is
actually based on Lucid Emacs 19.6, an older incarnation of XEmacs).
@end iftex

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node License, Distrib, Top, Top
@unnumbered GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@center Version 1, February 1989
@cindex license to copy XEmacs
@cindex General Public License

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1989 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@unnumberedsec Preamble

  The license agreements of most software companies try to keep users
at the mercy of those companies.  By contrast, our General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software---to make sure the software is free for all its users.  The
General Public License applies to the Free Software Foundation's
software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it.
You can use it for your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Specifically, the General Public License is designed to make
sure that you have the freedom to give away or sell copies of free
software, that you receive source code or can get it if you want it,
that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free
programs; and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

  For example, if you distribute copies of a such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code.  And you must tell them their rights.

  We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

  Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software.  If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

@iftex
@unnumberedsec TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end ifinfo

@enumerate
@item
This License Agreement applies to any program or other work which
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be
distributed under the terms of this General Public License.  The
``Program'', below, refers to any such program or work, and a ``work based
on the Program'' means either the Program or any work containing the
Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications.  Each
licensee is addressed as ``you''.

@item
@cindex Distribution
You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's source
code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and
appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice and
disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to this
General Public License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any
other recipients of the Program a copy of this General Public License
along with the Program.  You may charge a fee for the physical act of
transferring a copy.

@item
You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion of
it, and copy and distribute such modifications under the terms of Paragraph
1 above, provided that you also do the following:

@itemize @bullet
@item
cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that
you changed the files and the date of any change; and

@item
cause the whole of any work that you distribute or publish, that
in whole or in part contains the Program or any part thereof, either
with or without modifications, to be licensed at no charge to all
third parties under the terms of this General Public License (except
that you may choose to grant warranty protection to some or all
third parties, at your option).

@item
If the modified program normally reads commands interactively when
run, you must cause it, when started running for such interactive use
in the simplest and most usual way, to print or display an
announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a notice
that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide a
warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under these
conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this General
Public License.

@item
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a
copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in
exchange for a fee.
@end itemize

Mere aggregation of another independent work with the Program (or its
derivative) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not bring
the other work under the scope of these terms.

@item
You may copy and distribute the Program (or a portion or derivative of
it, under Paragraph 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Paragraphs 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

@itemize @bullet
@item
accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
source code, which must be distributed under the terms of
Paragraphs 1 and 2 above; or,

@item
accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
years, to give any third party free (except for a nominal charge
for the cost of distribution) a complete machine-readable copy of the
corresponding source code, to be distributed under the terms of
Paragraphs 1 and 2 above; or,

@item
accompany it with the information you received as to where the
corresponding source code may be obtained.  (This alternative is
allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
received the program in object code or executable form alone.)
@end itemize

Source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making
modifications to it.  For an executable file, complete source code means
all the source code for all modules it contains; but, as a special
exception, it need not include source code for modules which are standard
libraries that accompany the operating system on which the executable
file runs, or for standard header files or definitions files that
accompany that operating system.

@item
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, distribute or transfer the
Program except as expressly provided under this General Public License.
Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, distribute or transfer
the Program is void, and will automatically terminate your rights to use
the Program under this License.  However, parties who have received
copies, or rights to use copies, from you under this General Public
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties
remain in full compliance.

@item
By copying, distributing or modifying the Program (or any work based
on the Program) you indicate your acceptance of this license to do so,
and all its terms and conditions.

@item
Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the original
licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to these
terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further restrictions on the
recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.

@page
@item
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Program
specifies a version number of the license which applies to it and ``any
later version'', you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of
the license, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

@item
If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

@iftex
@heading NO WARRANTY
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center NO WARRANTY
@end ifinfo

@item
BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY
FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE THE PROGRAM ``AS IS'' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS
TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE
PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING,
REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

@item
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL
ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR
REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES
SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE
WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
@end enumerate

@iftex
@heading END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end ifinfo

@page
@unnumberedsec Appendix: How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

  If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to humanity, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these
terms.

  To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest to
attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively convey
the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least the
``copyright'' line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

@smallexample
@var{one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of what it does.}
Copyright (C) 19@var{yy}  @var{name of author}

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option)
any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
@end smallexample

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

@smallexample
Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) 19@var{yy} @var{name of author}
Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.
@end smallexample

The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the
appropriate parts of the General Public License.  Of course, the
commands you use may be called something other than `show w' and `show
c'; they could even be mouse-clicks or menu items---whatever suits your
program.

@page
You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your
school, if any, to sign a ``copyright disclaimer'' for the program, if
necessary.  Here a sample; alter the names:

@example
Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the
program `Gnomovision' (a program to direct compilers to make passes
at assemblers) written by James Hacker.

@var{signature of Ty Coon}, 1 April 1989
Ty Coon, President of Vice
@end example

That's all there is to it!

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@node Distrib, Intro, License, Top
@unnumbered Distribution

XEmacs is @dfn{free}; this means that everyone is free to use it and
free to redistribute it on a free basis.  XEmacs is not in the public
domain; it is copyrighted and there are restrictions on its
distribution, but these restrictions are designed to permit everything
that a good cooperating citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed
is to try to prevent others from further sharing any version of XEmacs
that they might get from you.  The precise conditions are found in
the GNU General Public License that comes with XEmacs and also appears
following this section.

The easiest way to get a copy of XEmacs is from someone else who has it.
You need not ask for permission to do so, or tell any one else; just copy
it.

If you have access to the Internet, you can get the latest version of
XEmacs from the anonymous FTP server @file{ftp.xemacs.org} in the directory
@file{/pub/xemacs}.  It can also be found at numerous other archive
sites around the world; check the file @file{etc/DISTRIB} in an XEmacs
distribution for the latest known list.


@unnumberedsec Getting Other Versions of Emacs

The Free Software Foundation's version of Emacs (called @dfn{FSF Emacs}
in this manual and often referred to as @dfn{GNU Emacs}) is available
by anonymous FTP from @file{prep.ai.mit.edu}.

Win-Emacs, an older version of XEmacs that runs on Microsoft Windows
and Windows NT, is available by anonymous FTP from @file{ftp.netcom.com}
in the directory @file{/pub/pe/pearl}, or from @file{ftp.cica.indiana.edu}
as the files @file{wemdemo*.zip} in the directory @file{/pub/pc/win3/demo}.

@node Intro, Glossary, Distrib, Top
@unnumbered Introduction

  You are reading about XEmacs, an incarnation of the advanced,
self-documenting, customizable, extensible real-time display editor
Emacs.  XEmacs provides many powerful display and user-interface
capabilities not found in other Emacsen and is mostly upwardly
compatible with GNU Emacs from the Free Software Foundation
(referred to as @dfn{FSF Emacs} in this manual).  XEmacs also
comes standard with a great number of useful packages.

  We say that XEmacs is a @dfn{display} editor because normally the text
being edited is visible on the screen and is updated automatically as you
type.  @xref{Frame,Display}.

  We call XEmacs a @dfn{real-time} editor because the display is updated very
frequently, usually after each character or pair of characters you
type.  This minimizes the amount of information you must keep in your
head as you edit.  @xref{Basic,Real-time,Basic Editing}.

  We call XEmacs advanced because it provides facilities that go beyond
simple insertion and deletion: filling of text; automatic indentation of
programs; viewing two or more files at once; and dealing in terms of
characters, words, lines, sentences, paragraphs, and pages, as well as
expressions and comments in several different programming languages.  It is
much easier to type one command meaning ``go to the end of the paragraph''
than to find that spot with simple cursor keys.

  @dfn{Self-documenting} means that at any time you can type a special
character, @kbd{Control-h}, to find out what your options are.  You can
also use @kbd{C-h} to find out what a command does, or to find all the
commands relevant to a topic.  @xref{Help}.

  @dfn{Customizable} means you can change the definitions of XEmacs
commands.  For example, if you use a programming language in
which comments start with @samp{<**} and end with @samp{**>}, you can tell
the XEmacs comment manipulation commands to use those strings
(@pxref{Comments}).  Another sort of customization is rearrangement of the
command set.  For example, you can set up the four basic cursor motion
commands (up, down, left and right) on keys in a diamond pattern on the
keyboard if you prefer.  @xref{Customization}.

  @dfn{Extensible} means you can go beyond simple customization and
write entirely new commands, programs in the Lisp language to be run by
XEmacs's own Lisp interpreter.  XEmacs is an ``on-line extensible''
system: it is divided into many functions that call each other.  You can
redefine any function in the middle of an editing session and replace
any part of XEmacs without making a separate copy of all of XEmacs.  Most
of the editing commands of XEmacs are written in Lisp; the few
exceptions could have been written in Lisp but are written in C for
efficiency.  Only a programmer can write an extension to XEmacs, but anybody
can use it afterward.

@include frame.texi
@include keystrokes.texi
@include menus.texi
@include entering.texi
@include cmdargs.texi
@include startup.texi
@include basic.texi
@include undo.texi
@include mini.texi
@include m-x.texi
@include help.texi
@include mark.texi
@include mouse.texi
@include killing.texi
@include regs.texi
@include display.texi
@include search.texi
@include fixit.texi
@include files.texi
@include buffers.texi
@include windows.texi
@include mule.texi
@include major.texi
@include indent.texi
@include text.texi
@include programs.texi
@include building.texi
@include packages.texi
@include abbrevs.texi
@include picture.texi
@include sending.texi
@include reading.texi
@include calendar.texi
@include misc.texi
@include custom.texi
@include trouble.texi

@include new.texi
@include glossary.texi
@include gnu.texi

@node Key Index, Command Index, Manifesto, Top
@unnumbered Key (Character) Index
@printindex ky

@node Command Index, Variable Index, Key Index, Top
@unnumbered Command and Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index, Concept Index, Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index, Frame, Variable Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@summarycontents
@contents
@bye


@c Remember to delete these lines before creating the info file.
@iftex
@lucidbook
@bindingoffset = 0.5in
@parindent = 0pt
@end iftex
