
@node Text, Programs, Indentation, Top
@chapter Commands for Human Languages
@cindex text

  The term @dfn{text} has two widespread meanings in our area of the
computer field.  One is data that is a sequence of characters.  In this
sense of the word any file that you edit with Emacs is text.  The other
meaning is more restrictive: a sequence of characters in a human
language for humans to read (possibly after processing by a text
formatter), as opposed to a program or commands for a program.

  Human languages have syntactic and stylistic conventions that editor
commands should support or use to advantage: conventions involving
words, sentences, paragraphs, and capital letters.  This chapter describes
Emacs commands for all these things.  There are also commands for
@dfn{filling}, or rearranging paragraphs into lines of approximately equal
length.  The commands for moving over and killing words, sentences,
and paragraphs, while intended primarily for editing text, are also often
useful for editing programs.

  Emacs has several major modes for editing human language text.
If a file contains plain text, use Text mode, which customizes
Emacs in small ways for the syntactic conventions of text.  For text which
contains embedded commands for text formatters, Emacs has other major modes,
each for a particular text formatter.  Thus, for input to @TeX{}, you can
use @TeX{} mode; for input to nroff, Nroff mode.

@menu
* Text Mode::   The major modes for editing text files.
* Nroff Mode::  The major mode for editing input to the formatter nroff.
* TeX Mode::    The major modes for editing input to the formatter TeX.
* Outline Mode:: The major mode for editing outlines.
* Words::       Moving over and killing words.
* Sentences::   Moving over and killing sentences.
* Paragraphs::	Moving over paragraphs.
* Pages::	Moving over pages.
* Filling::     Filling or justifying text
* Case::        Changing the case of text
@end menu

@node Text Mode, Words, Text, Text
@section Text Mode

@findex tab-to-tab-stop
@findex edit-tab-stops
@cindex Text mode
@kindex TAB
@findex text-mode
  You should use Text mode---rather than Fundamental or Lisp mode---to
edit files of text in a human language.  Invoke @kbd{M-x text-mode} to
enter Text mode.  In Text mode, @key{TAB} runs the function
@code{tab-to-tab-stop}, which allows you to use arbitrary tab stops set
with @kbd{M-x edit-tab-stops} (@pxref{Tab Stops}).  Features concerned
with comments in programs are turned off unless they are explicitly invoked.
The syntax table is changed so that periods are not considered part of a
word, while apostrophes, backspaces and underlines are.

@findex indented-text-mode
  A similar variant mode is Indented Text mode, intended for editing
text in which most lines are indented.  This mode defines @key{TAB} to
run @code{indent-relative} (@pxref{Indentation}), and makes Auto Fill
indent the lines it creates.  As a result, a line made by Auto Filling,
or by @key{LFD}, is normally indented just like the previous line.  Use
@kbd{M-x indented-text-mode} to select this mode.

@vindex text-mode-hook
  Entering Text mode or Indented Text mode calls the value of the
variable @code{text-mode-hook} with no arguments, if that value exists
and is not @code{nil}.  This value is also called when modes related to
Text mode are entered; this includes Nroff mode, @TeX{} mode, Outline
mode, and Mail mode.  Your hook can look at the value of
@code{major-mode} to see which of these modes is actually being entered.

  Two modes similar to Text mode are of use for editing text that is to
be passed through a text formatter before achieving its final readable form.

@menu
* Nroff Mode::  The major mode for editing input to the formatter nroff.
* TeX Mode::    The major modes for editing input to the formatter TeX.


  Another similar mode is used for editing outlines.  It allows you
to view the text at various levels of detail.  You can view either
the outline headings alone or both headings and text; you can also
hide some of the headings at lower levels from view to make the high
level structure more visible.


* Outline Mode:: The major mode for editing outlines.
@end menu

@node Nroff Mode, TeX Mode, Text Mode, Text Mode
@subsection Nroff Mode

@cindex nroff
@findex nroff-mode
  Nroff mode is a mode like Text mode but modified to handle nroff
commands present in the text.  Invoke @kbd{M-x nroff-mode} to enter this
mode.  Nroff mode differs from Text mode in only a few ways.  All nroff
command lines are considered paragraph separators, so that filling never
garbles the nroff commands.  Pages are separated by @samp{.bp} commands.
Comments start with backslash-doublequote.  There are also three special
commands that are not available in Text mode:

@findex forward-text-line
@findex backward-text-line
@findex count-text-lines
@kindex M-n
@kindex M-p
@kindex M-?
@table @kbd
@item M-n
Move to the beginning of the next line that isn't an nroff command
(@code{forward-text-line}).  An argument is a repeat count.
@item M-p
Like @kbd{M-n} but move up (@code{backward-text-line}).
@item M-?
Prints in the echo area the number of text lines (lines that are not
nroff commands) in the region (@code{count-text-lines}).
@end table

@findex electric-nroff-mode
  The other feature of Nroff mode is Electric Nroff newline mode.  
This is a minor mode that you can turn on or off with
@kbd{M-x electric-nroff-mode} (@pxref{Minor Modes}).  When the mode is
on and you use @key{RET} to end a line containing an nroff command
that opens a kind of grouping, Emacs automatically inserts the matching
nroff command to close that grouping on the following line.  For
example, if you are at the beginning of a line and type @kbd{.@:(b
@key{RET}}, the matching command @samp{.)b} will be inserted on a new
line following point.

@vindex nroff-mode-hook
  Entering Nroff mode calls the value of the variable
@code{text-mode-hook} with no arguments, if that value exists and is not
@code{nil}; then it does the same with the variable
@code{nroff-mode-hook}.

@node TeX Mode, Outline Mode, Nroff Mode, Text Mode
@subsection @TeX{} Mode
@cindex TeX
@cindex LaTeX
@findex TeX-mode
@findex tex-mode
@findex plain-tex-mode
@findex LaTeX-mode
@findex plain-TeX-mode
@findex latex-mode

  @TeX{} is a powerful text formatter written by Donald Knuth; like GNU
Emacs, it is free.  La@TeX{} is a simplified input format for @TeX{},
implemented by @TeX{} macros.  It is part of @TeX{}.@refill

  Emacs has a special @TeX{} mode for editing @TeX{} input files.
It provides facilities for checking the balance of delimiters and for
invoking @TeX{} on all or part of the file.

  @TeX{} mode has two variants, Plain @TeX{} mode and La@TeX{} mode,
which are two distinct major modes that differ only slightly.  These
modes are designed for editing the two different input formats.  The
command @kbd{M-x tex-mode} looks at the contents of a buffer to
determine whether it appears to be La@TeX{} input or not; it then
selects the appropriate mode.  If it can't tell which is right (e.g.,
the buffer is empty), the variable @code{tex-default-mode} controls
which mode is used.

  The commands @kbd{M-x plain-tex-mode} and @kbd{M-x latex-mode}
explicitly select one of the variants of @TeX{} mode.  Use these
commands when @kbd{M-x tex-mode} does not guess right.@refill

@menu
* Editing: TeX Editing.   Special commands for editing in TeX mode.
* Printing: TeX Print.    Commands for printing part of a file with TeX.
@end menu

  @TeX{} for Unix systems can be obtained from the University of Washington
for a distribution fee.

  To order a full distribution, send $140.00 for a 1/2 inch
9-track tape, $165.00 for two 4-track 1/4 inch cartridge tapes
(foreign sites $150.00, for 1/2 inch, $175.00 for 1/4 inch, to cover
the extra postage) payable to the University of Washington to:

@display
The Director
Northwest Computer Support Group,  DW-10
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington 98195
@end display

@noindent
Purchase orders are acceptable, but there is an extra charge of
$10.00 to pay for processing charges. (The total cost comes to $150 
for domestic sites, $175 for foreign sites).

  The normal distribution is a tar tape, blocked 20, 1600 bpi, on an
industry standard 2400 foot half-inch reel.  The physical format for
the 1/4 inch streamer cartridges uses QIC-11, 8000 bpi, 4-track
serpentine recording for the SUN.  Also, SystemV tapes can be written
in cpio format, blocked 5120 bytes, ASCII headers.

@node TeX Editing,TeX Print,TeX Mode,TeX Mode
@subsubsection @TeX{} Editing Commands

  Here are the special commands provided in @TeX{} mode for editing the
text of the file.

@table @kbd
@item "
Insert, according to context, either @samp{``} or @samp{"} or
@samp{''} (@code{TeX-insert-quote}).
@item @key{LFD}
Insert a paragraph break (two newlines) and check the previous
paragraph for unbalanced braces or dollar signs
(@code{tex-terminate-@*paragraph}).
@item M-x validate-tex-buffer
Check each paragraph in the buffer for unbalanced braces or dollar signs.
@item C-c @{
Insert @samp{@{@}} and position point between them (@code{tex-insert-braces}).
@item C-c @}
Move forward past the next unmatched close brace (@code{up-list}).
@item C-c C-e
Close a block for La@TeX{} (@code{tex-close-latex-block}).
@end table

@findex tex-insert-quote
@kindex " (TeX mode)
  In @TeX{}, the character @samp{"} is not normally used; you use @samp{``}
to start a quotation and @samp{''} to end one.  @TeX{} mode defines the key
@kbd{"} to insert @samp{``} after whitespace or an open brace, @samp{"}
after a backslash, or @samp{''} otherwise.  This is done by the command
@code{tex-insert-quote}.  If you need the character @samp{"} itself in
unusual contexts, use @kbd{C-q} to insert it.  Also, @kbd{"} with a
numeric argument always inserts that number of @samp{"} characters.

  In @TeX{} mode, @samp{$} has a special syntax code which attempts to
understand the way @TeX{} math mode delimiters match.  When you insert a
@samp{$} that is meant to exit math mode, the position of the matching
@samp{$} that entered math mode is displayed for a second.  This is the
same feature that displays the open brace that matches a close brace that
is inserted.  However, there is no way to tell whether a @samp{$} enters
math mode or leaves it; so when you insert a @samp{$} that enters math
mode, the previous @samp{$} position is shown as if it were a match, even
though they are actually unrelated.

@findex tex-insert-braces
@kindex C-c @{ (TeX mode)
@findex up-list
@kindex C-c @} (TeX mode)
  If you prefer to keep braces balanced at all times, you can use @kbd{C-c @{}
(@code{tex-insert-braces}) to insert a pair of braces.  It leaves point
between the two braces so you can insert the text that belongs inside.
Afterward, use the command @kbd{C-c @}} (@code{up-list}) to move forward
past the close brace.

@findex validate-tex-buffer
@findex tex-terminate-paragraph
@kindex LFD (TeX mode)
  There are two commands for checking the matching of braces.  @key{LFD}
(@code{tex-terminate-paragraph}) checks the paragraph before point, and
inserts two newlines to start a new paragraph.  It prints a message in the
echo area if any mismatch is found.  @kbd{M-x validate-tex-buffer} checks
the entire buffer, paragraph by paragraph.  When it finds a paragraph that
contains a mismatch, it displays point at the beginning of the paragraph
for a few seconds and pushes a mark at that spot.  Scanning continues
until the whole buffer has been checked or until you type another key.
The positions of the last several paragraphs with mismatches can be
found in the mark ring (@pxref{Mark Ring}).

  Note that square brackets and parentheses, not just braces, are
matched in @TeX{} mode.  This is wrong if you want to  check @TeX{} syntax.
However, parentheses and square brackets are likely to be used in text as
matching delimiters and it is useful for the various motion commands and
automatic match display to work with them.

@findex tex-close-latex-block
@kindex C-c C-f (LaTeX mode)
  In La@TeX{} input, @samp{\begin} and @samp{\end} commands must balance.
After you insert a @samp{\begin}, use @kbd{C-c C-f}
(@code{tex-close-latex-block}) to insert automatically a matching
@samp{\end} (on a new line following the @samp{\begin}).  A blank line is
inserted between the two, and point is left there.@refill

@node TeX Print,,TeX Editing,TeX Mode
@subsubsection @TeX{} Printing Commands

  You can invoke @TeX{} as an inferior of Emacs on either the entire
contents of the buffer or just a region at a time.  Running @TeX{} in
this way on just one chapter is a good way to see what your changes
look like without taking the time to format the entire file.

@table @kbd
@item C-c C-r
Invoke @TeX{} on the current region, plus the buffer's header
(@code{tex-region}).
@item C-c C-b
Invoke @TeX{} on the entire current buffer (@code{tex-buffer}).
@item C-c C-l
Recenter the window showing output from the inferior @TeX{} so that
the last line can be seen (@code{tex-recenter-output-buffer}).
@item C-c C-k
Kill the inferior @TeX{} (@code{tex-kill-job}).
@item C-c C-p
Print the output from the last @kbd{C-c C-r} or @kbd{C-c C-b} command
(@code{tex-print}).
@item C-c C-q
Show the printer queue (@code{tex-show-print-queue}).
@end table

@findex tex-buffer
@kindex C-c C-b (TeX mode)
@findex tex-print
@kindex C-c C-p (TeX mode)
@findex tex-show-print-queue
@kindex C-c C-q (TeX mode)
  You can pass the current buffer through an inferior @TeX{} using
@kbd{C-c C-b} (@code{tex-buffer}).  The formatted output appears in a file
in @file{/tmp}; to print it, type @kbd{C-c C-p} (@code{tex-print}).
Afterward use @kbd{C-c C-q} (@code{tex-show-print-queue}) to view the
progress of your output towards being printed.

@findex tex-kill-job
@kindex C-c C-k (TeX mode)
@findex tex-recenter-output-buffer
@kindex C-c C-l (TeX mode)
  The console output from @TeX{}, including any error messages, appears in a
buffer called @samp{*TeX-shell*}.  If @TeX{} gets an error, you can switch
to this buffer and feed it input (this works as in Shell mode;
@pxref{Interactive Shell}).  Without switching to this buffer, you can scroll
it so that its last line is visible by typing @kbd{C-c C-l}.

  Type @kbd{C-c C-k} (@code{tex-kill-job}) to kill the @TeX{} process if
you see that its output is no longer useful.  Using @kbd{C-c C-b} or
@kbd{C-c C-r} also kills any @TeX{} process still running.@refill

@findex tex-region
@kindex C-c C-r (TeX mode)
  You can pass an arbitrary region through an inferior @TeX{} by typing
@kbd{C-c C-r} (@code{tex-region}).  This is tricky, however, because
most files of @TeX{} input contain commands at the beginning to set
parameters and define macros.  Without them, no later part of the file
will format correctly.  To solve this problem, @kbd{C-c C-r} allows you
to designate a part of the file as containing essential commands; it is
included before the specified region as part of the input to @TeX{}.
The designated part of the file is called the @dfn{header}.

@cindex header (TeX mode)
  To indicate the bounds of the header in Plain @TeX{} mode, insert two
special strings in the file: @samp{%**start of header} before the
header, and @samp{%**end of header} after it.  Each string must appear
entirely on one line, but there may be other text on the line before or
after.  The lines containing the two strings are included in the header.
If @samp{%**start of header} does not appear within the first 100 lines of
the buffer, @kbd{C-c C-r} assumes there is no header.

  In La@TeX{} mode, the header begins with @samp{\documentstyle} and ends
with @*@samp{\begin@{document@}}.  These are commands that La@TeX{} requires
you to use, so you don't need to do anything special to identify the
header.

@vindex TeX-mode-hook
@vindex LaTeX-mode-hook
@vindex plain-TeX-mode-hook
  When you enter either kind of @TeX{} mode, Emacs calls with no
arguments the value of the variable @code{text-mode-hook}, if that value
exists and is not @code{nil}.  Emacs then calls the variable
@code{TeX-mode-hook} and either @code{plain-TeX-mode-hook} or
@code{LaTeX-mode-hook} under the same conditions.

@node Outline Mode,, TeX Mode, Text Mode
@subsection Outline Mode
@cindex outlines
@cindex selective display
@cindex invisible lines

  Outline mode is a major mode similar to Text mode but intended for editing
outlines.  It allows you to make parts of the text temporarily invisible
so that you can see just the overall structure of the outline.  Type
@kbd{M-x outline-mode} to turn on Outline mode in the current buffer.

@vindex outline-mode-hook
  When you enter Outline mode, Emacs calls with no arguments the value
of the variable @code{text-mode-hook}, if that value exists and is not
@code{nil}; then it does the same with the variable
@code{outline-mode-hook}.

  When a line is invisible in outline mode, it does not appear on the
screen.  The screen appears exactly as if the invisible line
were deleted, except that an ellipsis (three periods in a row) appears
at the end of the previous visible line (only one ellipsis no matter
how many invisible lines follow).

  All editing commands treat the text of the invisible line as part of the
previous visible line.  For example, @kbd{C-n} moves onto the next visible
line.  Killing an entire visible line, including its terminating newline,
really kills all the following invisible lines as well; yanking
everything back yanks the invisible lines and they remain invisible.

@menu
* Format: Outline Format.	  What the text of an outline looks like.
* Motion: Outline Motion.	  Special commands for moving through outlines.
* Visibility: Outline Visibility. Commands to control what is visible.
@end menu

@node Outline Format,Outline Motion,Outline Mode, Outline Mode
@subsubsection Format of Outlines

@cindex heading lines (Outline mode)
@cindex body lines (Outline mode)
  Outline mode assumes that the lines in the buffer are of two types:
@dfn{heading lines} and @dfn{body lines}.  A heading line represents a
topic in the outline.  Heading lines start with one or more stars; the
number of stars determines the depth of the heading in the outline
structure.  Thus, a heading line with one star is a major topic; all the
heading lines with two stars between it and the next one-star heading
are its subtopics; and so on.  Any line that is not a heading line is a
body line.  Body lines belong to the preceding heading line.  Here is an
example:

@example
* Food

This is the body,
which says something about the topic of food.

** Delicious Food

This is the body of the second-level header.

** Distasteful Food

This could have
a body too, with
several lines.

*** Dormitory Food

* Shelter

A second first-level topic with its header line.
@end example

  A heading line together with all following body lines is called
collectively an @dfn{entry}.  A heading line together with all following
deeper heading lines and their body lines is called a @dfn{subtree}.

@vindex outline-regexp
 You can customize the criterion for distinguishing heading lines by
setting the variable @code{outline-regexp}.  Any line whose beginning
has a match for this regexp is considered a heading line.  Matches that
start within a line (not at the beginning) do not count.  The length of
the matching text determines the level of the heading; longer matches
make a more deeply nested level.  Thus, for example, if a text formatter
has commands @samp{@@chapter}, @samp{@@section} and @samp{@@subsection}
to divide the document into chapters and sections, you can make those
lines count as heading lines by setting @code{outline-regexp} to
@samp{"@@chap\\|@@\\(sub\\)*section"}.  Note the trick: the two words
@samp{chapter} and @samp{section} are the same length, but by defining
the regexp to match only @samp{chap} we ensure that the length of the
text matched on a chapter heading is shorter, so that Outline mode will
know that sections are contained in chapters.  This works as long as no
other command starts with @samp{@@chap}.

  Outline mode makes a line invisible by changing the newline before it
into an ASCII Control-M (code 015).  Most editing commands that work on
lines treat an invisible line as part of the previous line because,
strictly speaking, it @i{is} part of that line, since there is no longer a
newline in between.  When you save the file in Outline mode, Control-M
characters are saved as newlines, so the invisible lines become ordinary
lines in the file.  Saving does not change the visibility status of a
line inside Emacs.

@node Outline Motion,Outline Visibility,Outline Format,Outline Mode
@subsubsection Outline Motion Commands

   Some special commands in Outline mode move backward and forward to
heading lines.

@table @kbd
@item C-c C-n
Move point to the next visible heading line
(@code{outline-next-visible-heading}).
@item C-c C-p
Move point to the previous visible heading line @*
(@code{outline-previous-visible-heading}).
@item C-c C-f
Move point to the next visible heading line at the same level
as the one point is on (@code{outline-forward-same-level}).
@item C-c C-b
Move point to the previous visible heading line at the same level
(@code{outline-backward-same-level}).
@item C-c C-u
Move point up to a lower-level (more inclusive) visible heading line
(@code{outline-up-heading}).
@end table

@findex outline-next-visible-heading
@findex outline-previous-visible-heading
@kindex C-c C-n (Outline mode)
@kindex C-c C-p (Outline mode)
  @kbd{C-c C-n} (@code{next-visible-heading}) moves down to the next
heading line.  @kbd{C-c C-p} (@code{previous-visible-heading}) moves
similarly backward.  Both accept numeric arguments as repeat counts.  The
names emphasize that invisible headings are skipped, but this is not really
a special feature.  All editing commands that look for lines ignore the
invisible lines automatically.@refill

@findex outline-up-heading
@findex outline-forward-same-level
@findex outline-backward-same-level
@kindex C-c C-f (Outline mode)
@kindex C-c C-b (Outline mode)
@kindex C-c C-u (Outline mode)
  More advanced motion commands understand the levels of headings.
The commands @kbd{C-c C-f} (@code{outline-forward-same-level}) and
@kbd{C-c C-b} (@code{outline-backward-same-level}) move from one
heading line to another visible heading at the same depth in
the outline.  @kbd{C-c C-u} (@code{outline-up-heading}) moves
backward to another heading that is less deeply nested.

@node Outline Visibility,,Outline Motion,Outline Mode
@subsubsection Outline Visibility Commands

  The other special commands of outline mode are used to make lines visible
or invisible.  Their names all start with @code{hide} or @code{show}.
Most of them exist as pairs of opposites.  They are not undoable; instead,
you can undo right past them.  Making lines visible or invisible is simply
not recorded by the undo mechanism.

@table @kbd
@item M-x hide-body
Make all body lines in the buffer invisible.
@item M-x show-all
Make all lines in the buffer visible.
@item C-c C-d
Make everything under this heading invisible, not including this
heading itself (@code{hide-subtree}).
@item C-c C-s
Make everything under this heading visible, including body,
subheadings, and their bodies (@code{show-subtree}).
@item M-x hide-leaves
Make the body of this heading line, and of all its subheadings,
invisible.
@item M-x show-branches
Make all subheadings of this heading line, at all levels, visible.
@item C-c C-i
Make immediate subheadings (one level down) of this heading line
visible (@code{show-children}).
@item M-x hide-entry
Make this heading line's body invisible.
@item M-x show-entry
Make this heading line's body visible.
@end table

@findex hide-entry
@findex show-entry
  Two commands that are exact opposites are @kbd{M-x hide-entry} and
@kbd{M-x show-entry}.  They are used with point on a heading line, and
apply only to the body lines of that heading.  The subtopics and their
bodies are not affected.

@findex hide-subtree
@findex show-subtree
@kindex C-c C-d (Outline mode)
@kindex C-c C-h (Outline mode)
@cindex subtree (Outline mode)
  Two more powerful opposites are @kbd{C-c C-d} (@code{hide-subtree}) and
@kbd{C-c C-s} (@code{show-subtree}).  Both should be used when point is
on a heading line, and both apply to all the lines of that heading's
@dfn{subtree}: its body, all its subheadings, both direct and indirect, and
all of their bodies.  In other words, the subtree contains everything
following this heading line, up to and not including the next heading of
the same or higher rank.@refill

@findex hide-leaves
@findex show-branches
  Intermediate between a visible subtree and an invisible one is having
all the subheadings visible but none of the body.  There are two commands
for doing this, one that hides the bodies and one that
makes the subheadings visible.  They are @kbd{M-x hide-leaves} and
@kbd{M-x show-branches}.

@kindex C-c C-i (Outline mode)
@findex show-children
  A little weaker than @code{show-branches} is @kbd{C-c C-i}
(@code{show-children}).  It makes just the direct subheadings
visible---those one level down.  Deeper subheadings remain
invisible.@refill

@findex hide-body
@findex show-all
  Two commands have a blanket effect on the whole file.  @kbd{M-x
hide-body} makes all body lines invisible, so that you see just the
outline structure.  @kbd{M-x show-all} makes all lines visible.  You can
think of these commands as a pair of opposites even though @kbd{M-x
show-all} applies to more than just body lines.

@vindex selective-display-ellipses
You can turn off the use of ellipses at the ends of visible lines by
setting @code{selective-display-ellipses} to @code{nil}.  The result is
no visible indication of the presence of invisible lines.

@node Words, Sentences, Text Mode, Text
@section Words
@cindex words
@cindex Meta

  Emacs has commands for moving over or operating on words.  By convention,
the keys for them are all @kbd{Meta-} characters.

@c widecommands
@table @kbd
@item M-f
Move forward over a word (@code{forward-word}).
@item M-b
Move backward over a word (@code{backward-word}).
@item M-d
Kill up to the end of a word (@code{kill-word}).
@item M-@key{DEL}
Kill back to the beginning of a word (@code{backward-kill-word}).
@item M-@@
Mark the end of the next word (@code{mark-word}).
@item M-t
Transpose two words;  drag a word forward
or backward across other words (@code{transpose-words}).
@end table

  Notice how these keys form a series that parallels the
character-based @kbd{C-f}, @kbd{C-b}, @kbd{C-d}, @kbd{C-t} and
@key{DEL}.  @kbd{M-@@} is related to @kbd{C-@@}, which is an alias for
@kbd{C-@key{SPC}}.@refill

@kindex M-f
@kindex M-b
@findex forward-word
@findex backward-word
  The commands @kbd{Meta-f} (@code{forward-word}) and @kbd{Meta-b}
(@code{backward-word}) move forward and backward over words.  They are
analogous to @kbd{Control-f} and @kbd{Control-b}, which move over single
characters.  Like their @kbd{Control-} analogues, @kbd{Meta-f} and
@kbd{Meta-b} move several words if given an argument.  @kbd{Meta-f} with a
negative argument moves backward, and @kbd{Meta-b} with a negative argument
moves forward.  Forward motion stops after the last letter of the
word, while backward motion stops before the first letter.@refill

@kindex M-d
@findex kill-word
  @kbd{Meta-d} (@code{kill-word}) kills the word after point.  To be
precise, it kills everything from point to the place @kbd{Meta-f} would
move to.  Thus, if point is in the middle of a word, @kbd{Meta-d} kills
just the part after point.  If some punctuation comes between point and the
next word, it is killed along with the word.  (To kill only the
next word but not the punctuation before it, simply type @kbd{Meta-f} to get
to the end and kill the word backwards with @kbd{Meta-@key{DEL}}.)
@kbd{Meta-d} takes arguments just like @kbd{Meta-f}.

@findex backward-kill-word
@kindex M-DEL
  @kbd{Meta-@key{DEL}} (@code{backward-kill-word}) kills the word before
point.  It kills everything from point back to where @kbd{Meta-b} would
move to.  If point is after the space in @w{@samp{FOO, BAR}}, then
@w{@samp{FOO, }} is killed.   To kill just @samp{FOO}, type
@kbd{Meta-b Meta-d} instead of @kbd{Meta-@key{DEL}}.

@cindex transposition
@kindex M-t
@findex transpose-words
  @kbd{Meta-t} (@code{transpose-words}) exchanges the word before or
containing point with the following word.  The delimiter characters
between the words do not move.  For example, transposing @w{@samp{FOO,
BAR}} results in @w{@samp{BAR, FOO}} rather than @samp{@w{BAR FOO,}}.
@xref{Transpose}, for more on transposition and on arguments to
transposition commands.

@kindex M-@@
@findex mark-word
  To operate on the next @var{n} words with an operation which applies
between point and mark, you can either set the mark at point and then move
over the words, or you can use the command @kbd{Meta-@@} (@code{mark-word})
which does not move point but sets the mark where @kbd{Meta-f} would move
to.  It can be given arguments just like @kbd{Meta-f}.

@cindex syntax table
  The word commands' understanding of syntax is completely controlled by
the syntax table.  For example, any character can be declared to be a word
delimiter.  @xref{Syntax}.

@node Sentences, Paragraphs, Words, Text
@section Sentences
@cindex sentences

  The Emacs commands for manipulating sentences and paragraphs are mostly
on @kbd{Meta-} keys, and therefore are like the word-handling commands.

@table @kbd
@item M-a
Move back to the beginning of the sentence (@code{backward-sentence}).
@item M-e
Move forward to the end of the sentence (@code{forward-sentence}).
@item M-k
Kill forward to the end of the sentence (@code{kill-sentence}).
@item C-x @key{DEL}
Kill back to the beginning of the sentence @*(@code{backward-kill-sentence}).
@end table

@kindex M-a
@kindex M-e
@findex backward-sentence
@findex forward-sentence
  The commands @kbd{Meta-a} and @kbd{Meta-e} (@code{backward-sentence}
and @code{forward-sentence}) move to the beginning and end of the
current sentence, respectively.  They resemble @kbd{Control-a} and
@kbd{Control-e}, which move to the beginning and end of a line.  Unlike
their counterparts, @kbd{Meta-a} and @kbd{Meta-e} move over successive
sentences if repeated or given numeric arguments.  Emacs assumes
the typist's convention is followed, and thus considers a sentence to
end wherever there is a @samp{.}, @samp{?}, or @samp{!} followed by the
end of a line or two spaces, with any number of @samp{)}, @samp{]},
@samp{'}, or @samp{"} characters allowed in between.  A sentence also
begins or ends wherever a paragraph begins or ends.@refill

  Neither @kbd{M-a} nor @kbd{M-e} moves past the newline or spaces beyond
the sentence edge at which it is stopping.

@kindex M-k
@kindex C-x DEL
@findex kill-sentence
@findex backward-kill-sentence
 @kbd{M-a} and @kbd{M-e} have a corresponding kill command, just like
@kbd{C-a} and @kbd{C-e} have @kbd{C-k}.  The command is  @kbd{M-k}
(@code{kill-sentence}) which kills from point to the end of the
sentence.  With minus one as an argument it kills back to the beginning
of the sentence.  Larger arguments serve as repeat counts.@refill

  There is a special command, @kbd{C-x @key{DEL}}
(@code{backward-kill-sentence}), for killing back to the beginning of a
sentence, which is useful when you change your mind in the middle of
composing text.@refill

@vindex sentence-end
  The variable @code{sentence-end} controls recognition of the end of a
sentence.  It is a regexp that matches the last few characters of a
sentence, together with the whitespace following the sentence.  Its
normal value is:

@example
"[.?!][]\"')]*\\($\\|\t\\|  \\)[ \t\n]*"
@end example

@noindent
This example is explained in the section on regexps.  @xref{Regexps}.

@node Paragraphs, Pages, Sentences, Text
@section Paragraphs
@cindex paragraphs
@kindex M-@{
@kindex M-@}
@findex backward-paragraph
@findex forward-paragraph

  The Emacs commands for manipulating paragraphs are also @kbd{Meta-}
keys.

@table @kbd
@item M-@{
Move back to previous paragraph beginning @*(@code{backward-paragraph}).
@item M-@}
Move forward to next paragraph end (@code{forward-paragraph}).
@item M-h
Put point and mark around this or next paragraph (@code{mark-paragraph}).
@end table

  @kbd{Meta-@{} moves to the beginning of the current or previous paragraph,
while @kbd{Meta-@}} moves to the end of the current or next paragraph.
Blank lines and text formatter command lines separate paragraphs and are
not part of any paragraph.  An indented line starts a new paragraph.

  In major modes for programs (as opposed to Text mode), paragraphs begin
and end only at blank lines.  As a result, the paragraph commands continue to
be useful even though there are no paragraphs per se.

  When there is a fill prefix, paragraphs are delimited by all lines
which don't start with the fill prefix.  @xref{Filling}.

@kindex M-h
@findex mark-paragraph
   To operate on a paragraph, you can use the command
@kbd{Meta-h} (@code{mark-paragraph}) to set the region around it.  This
command puts point at the beginning and mark at the end of the paragraph
point was in.  If point is between paragraphs (in a run of blank lines or
at a boundary), the paragraph following point is surrounded by point and
mark.  If there are blank lines preceding the first line of the paragraph,
one of the blank lines is included in the region.  Thus, for example,
@kbd{M-h C-w} kills the paragraph around or after point.

@vindex paragraph-start
@vindex paragraph-separate
  The precise definition of a paragraph boundary is controlled by the
variables @code{paragraph-separate} and @code{paragraph-start}.  The value
of @code{paragraph-start} is a regexp that matches any line that
either starts or separates paragraphs.  The value of
@code{paragraph-separate} is another regexp that  matches only lines
that separate paragraphs without being part of any paragraph.  Lines that
start a new paragraph and are contained in it must match both regexps.  For
example, normally @code{paragraph-start} is @code{"^[ @t{\}t@t{\}n@t{\}f]"}
and @code{paragraph-separate} is @code{"^[ @t{\}t@t{\}f]*$"}.@refill

  Normally it is desirable for page boundaries to separate paragraphs.
The default values of these variables recognize the usual separator for
pages.

@node Pages, Filling, Paragraphs, Text
@section Pages

@cindex pages
@cindex formfeed
  Files are often thought of as divided into @dfn{pages} by the
@dfn{formfeed} character (ASCII Control-L, octal code 014).  For
example, if a file is printed on a line printer, each ``page'' of the
file starts on a new page of paper.  Emacs treats a page-separator
character just like any other character.  It can be inserted with
@kbd{C-q C-l} or deleted with @key{DEL}.  You are free to
paginate your file or not.  However, since pages are often meaningful
divisions of the file, commands are provided to move over them and
operate on them.

@c WideCommands
@table @kbd
@item C-x [
Move point to previous page boundary (@code{backward-page}).
@item C-x ]
Move point to next page boundary (@code{forward-page}).
@item C-x C-p
Put point and mark around this page (or another page) (@code{mark-page}).
@item C-x l
Count the lines in this page (@code{count-lines-page}).
@end table

@kindex C-x [
@kindex C-x ]
@findex forward-page
@findex backward-page
  The @kbd{C-x [} (@code{backward-page}) command moves point to
immediately after the previous page delimiter.  If point is already
right after a page delimiter, the command skips that one and stops at
the previous one.  A numeric argument serves as a repeat count.  The
@kbd{C-x ]} (@code{forward-page}) command moves forward past the next
page delimiter.

@kindex C-x C-p
@findex mark-page
  The @kbd{C-x C-p} command (@code{mark-page}) puts point at the beginning
of the current page and the mark at the end.  The page delimiter at the end
is included (the mark follows it).  The page delimiter at the front is
excluded (point follows it).  You can follow this command  by @kbd{C-w} to
kill a page you want to move elsewhere.  If you insert the page after a page
delimiter, at a place where @kbd{C-x ]} or @kbd{C-x [} would take you,
the page will be properly delimited before and after once again.

  A numeric argument to @kbd{C-x C-p} is used to specify which page to go
to, relative to the current one.  Zero means the current page.  One means
the next page, and @minus{}1 means the previous one.

@kindex C-x l
@findex count-lines-page
  The @kbd{C-x l} command (@code{count-lines-page}) can help you decide
where to break a page in two.  It prints the total number of lines in
the current page in the echo area, then divides the lines into those
preceding the current line and those following it, for example

@example
Page has 96 (72+25) lines
@end example

@noindent
  Notice that the sum is off by one; this is correct if point is not at the
beginning of a line.

@vindex page-delimiter
  The variable @code{page-delimiter} should have as its value a regexp that
matches the beginning of a line that separates pages.  This defines
where pages begin.  The normal value of this variable is @code{"^@t{\}f"},
which matches a formfeed character at the beginning of a line.

@node Filling, Case, Pages, Text
@section Filling Text
@cindex filling

  If you use Auto Fill mode, Emacs @dfn{fills} text (breaks it up into
lines that fit in a specified width) as you insert it.  When you alter
existing text it is often no longer be properly filled afterwards and
you can use explicit commands for filling.

@menu
* Auto Fill::	  Auto Fill mode breaks long lines automatically.
* Fill Commands:: Commands to refill paragraphs and center lines.
* Fill Prefix::   Filling when every line is indented or in a comment, etc.
@end menu

@node Auto Fill, Fill Commands, Filling, Filling
@subsection Auto Fill Mode

@cindex Auto Fill mode

  @dfn{Auto Fill} mode is a minor mode in which lines are broken
automatically when they become too wide.  Breaking happens only when
you type a @key{SPC} or @key{RET}.

@table @kbd
@item M-x auto-fill-mode
Enable or disable Auto Fill mode.
@item @key{SPC}
@itemx @key{RET}
In Auto Fill mode, break lines when appropriate.
@end table

@findex auto-fill-mode
  @kbd{M-x auto-fill-mode} turns Auto Fill mode on if it was off, or off
if it was on.  With a positive numeric argument the command always turns
Auto Fill mode on, and with a negative argument it always turns it off.
The presence of the word @samp{Fill} in the mode line, inside the
parentheses, indicates that Auto Fill mode is in effect.  Auto Fill mode
is a minor mode; you can turn it on or off for each buffer individually.
@xref{Minor Modes}.

  In Auto Fill mode, lines are broken automatically at spaces when they get
longer than desired.  Line breaking and rearrangement takes place
only when you type @key{SPC} or @key{RET}.  To insert a space
or newline without permitting line-breaking, type @kbd{C-q @key{SPC}} or
@kbd{C-q @key{LFD}} (recall that a newline is really a linefeed).
@kbd{C-o} inserts a newline without line breaking.

  Auto Fill mode works well with Lisp mode: when it makes a new line in
Lisp mode, it indents that line with @key{TAB}.  If a line ending in a
Lisp comment gets too long, the text of the comment is split into two
comment lines.  Optionally, new comment delimiters are inserted at the
end of the first line and the beginning of the second, so that each line
is a separate comment.  The variable @code{comment-multi-line} controls
the choice (@pxref{Comments}).

  Auto Fill mode does not refill entire paragraphs.  It can break lines but
cannot merge lines.  Editing in the middle of a paragraph can result in
a paragraph that is not correctly filled.  The easiest way to make the
paragraph properly filled again is using an explicit fill commands.

  Many users like Auto Fill mode and want to use it in all text files.
The section on init files explains how you can arrange this
permanently for yourself.  @xref{Init File}.

@node Fill Commands, Fill Prefix, Auto Fill, Filling
@subsection Explicit Fill Commands

@table @kbd
@item M-q
Fill current paragraph (@code{fill-paragraph}).
@item M-g
Fill each paragraph in the region (@code{fill-region}).
@item C-x f
Set the fill column (@code{set-fill-column}).
@item M-x fill-region-as-paragraph
Fill the region, considering it as one paragraph.
@item M-s
Center a line.
@end table

@kindex M-q
@findex fill-paragraph
  To refill a paragraph, use the command @kbd{Meta-q}
(@code{fill-paragraph}).  It causes the paragraph containing point, or
the one after point if point is between paragraphs, to be refilled.  All
line breaks are removed, and new ones are inserted where necessary.
@kbd{M-q} can be undone with @kbd{C-_}.  @xref{Undo}.@refill

@kindex M-g
@findex fill-region
  To refill many paragraphs, use @kbd{M-g} (@code{fill-region}), which
divides the region into paragraphs and fills each of them.

@findex fill-region-as-paragraph
  @kbd{Meta-q} and @kbd{Meta-g} use the same criteria as @kbd{Meta-h} for
finding paragraph boundaries (@pxref{Paragraphs}).  For more control, you
can use @kbd{M-x fill-region-as-paragraph}, which refills everything
between point and mark.  This command recognizes only blank lines as
paragraph separators.@refill

@cindex justification
  A numeric argument to @kbd{M-g} or @kbd{M-q} causes it to
@dfn{justify} the text as well as filling it.  Extra spaces are inserted
to make the right margin line up exactly at the fill column.  To remove
the extra spaces, use @kbd{M-q} or @kbd{M-g} with no argument.@refill

@vindex auto-fill-inhibit-regexp
The variable @code{auto-fill-inhibit-regexp} takes as a value a regexp to
match lines that should not be auto-filled.

@kindex M-s
@cindex centering
@findex center-line
  The command @kbd{Meta-s} (@code{center-line}) centers the current line
within the current fill column.  With an argument, it centers several lines
individually and moves past them.

@vindex fill-column
  The maximum line width for filling is in the variable
@code{fill-column}.  Altering the value of @code{fill-column} makes it
local to the current buffer; until then, the default value---initially
70---is in effect. @xref{Locals}.

@kindex C-x f
@findex set-fill-column
  The easiest way to set @code{fill-column} is to use the command @kbd{C-x
f} (@code{set-fill-column}).  With no argument, it sets @code{fill-column}
to the current horizontal position of point.  With a numeric argument, it
uses that number as the new fill column.

@node Fill Prefix,, Fill Commands, Filling
@subsection The Fill Prefix

@cindex fill prefix
  To fill a paragraph in which each line starts with a special marker
(which might be a few spaces, giving an indented paragraph), use the
@dfn{fill prefix} feature.  The fill prefix is a string which is not
included in filling.  Emacs expects every line to start with a fill
prefix.

@table @kbd
@item C-x .
Set the fill prefix (@code{set-fill-prefix}).
@item M-q
Fill a paragraph using current fill prefix (@code{fill-paragraph}).
@item M-x fill-individual-paragraphs
Fill the region, considering each change of indentation as starting a
new paragraph.
@end table

@kindex C-x .
@findex set-fill-prefix
  To specify a fill prefix, move to a line that starts with the desired
prefix, put point at the end of the prefix, and give the command
@w{@kbd{C-x .}}@: (@code{set-fill-prefix}).  That's a period after the
@kbd{C-x}.  To turn off the fill prefix, specify an empty prefix: type
@w{@kbd{C-x .}}@: with point at the beginning of a line.@refill

  When a fill prefix is in effect, the fill commands remove the fill
prefix from each line before filling and insert it on each line after
filling.  Auto Fill mode also inserts the fill prefix inserted on new
lines it creates.  Lines that do not start with the fill prefix are
considered to start paragraphs, both in @kbd{M-q} and the paragraph
commands; this is just right if you are using paragraphs with hanging
indentation (every line indented except the first one).  Lines which are
blank or indented once the prefix is removed also separate or start
paragraphs; this is what you want if you are writing multi-paragraph
comments with a comment delimiter on each line.

@vindex fill-prefix
  The fill prefix is stored in the variable @code{fill-prefix}.  Its value
is a string, or @code{nil} when there is no fill prefix.  This is a
per-buffer variable; altering the variable affects only the current buffer,
but there is a default value which you can change as well.  @xref{Locals}.

@findex fill-individual-paragraphs
  Another way to use fill prefixes is through @kbd{M-x
fill-individual-paragraphs}.  This function divides the region into groups
of consecutive lines with the same amount and kind of indentation and fills
each group as a paragraph, using its indentation as a fill prefix.

@node Case,, Filling, Text
@section Case Conversion Commands
@cindex case conversion

  Emacs has commands for converting either a single word or any arbitrary
range of text to upper case or to lower case.

@c WideCommands
@table @kbd
@item M-l
Convert following word to lower case (@code{downcase-word}).
@item M-u
Convert following word to upper case (@code{upcase-word}).
@item M-c
Capitalize the following word (@code{capitalize-word}).
@item C-x C-l
Convert region to lower case (@code{downcase-region}).
@item C-x C-u
Convert region to upper case (@code{upcase-region}).
@end table

@kindex M-l
@kindex M-u
@kindex M-c
@cindex words
@findex downcase-word
@findex upcase-word
@findex capitalize-word
  The word conversion commands are used most frequently.  @kbd{Meta-l}
(@code{downcase-word}) converts the word after point to lower case,
moving past it.  Thus, repeating @kbd{Meta-l} converts successive words.
@kbd{Meta-u} (@code{upcase-word}) converts to all capitals instead,
while @kbd{Meta-c} (@code{capitalize-word}) puts the first letter of the
word into upper case and the rest into lower case.  The word conversion
commands convert several words at once if given an argument.  They are
especially convenient for converting a large amount of text from all
upper case to mixed case: you can move through the text using
@kbd{M-l}, @kbd{M-u}, or @kbd{M-c} on each word as appropriate,
occasionally using @kbd{M-f} instead to skip a word.

  When given a negative argument, the word case conversion commands apply
to the appropriate number of words before point, but do not move point.
This is convenient when you have just typed a word in the wrong case: you
can give the case conversion command and continue typing.

  If a word case conversion command is given in the middle of a word, it
applies only to the part of the word which follows point.  This is just
like what @kbd{Meta-d} (@code{kill-word}) does.  With a negative argument,
case conversion applies only to the part of the word before point.

@kindex C-x C-l
@kindex C-x C-u
@cindex region
@findex downcase-region
@findex upcase-region
  The other case conversion commands are @kbd{C-x C-u}
(@code{upcase-region}) and @kbd{C-x C-l} (@code{downcase-region}), which
convert everything between point and mark to the specified case.  Point and
mark do not move.@refill
