@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the SXEmacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2005 Sebastian Freundt <hroptatyr@sxemacs.org>
@c Copyright (C) 2005 Zajcev Evgeny <lg@xwem.org>
@c See the file lispref.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../../info/ffi.info

@node Foreign Functions, MULE, Internationalization, Top
@chapter Foreign Function Interface (FFI)
@cindex FO
@cindex FFI
@cindex foreign objects
@cindex foreign functions

@macro FFI
FFI
@end macro

  The SXEmacs @dfn{Foreign Function Interface} (@FFI{} for short) adds
support for invoking code written in other programming languages from
within elisp.  The @FFI{} focuses on interaction with C code, but the
basic framework can also be used for interfacing to languages other
than C, provided they support to be compiled to binary and linked into
a @dfn{shared library}.

  The SXEmacs @FFI{} can access sharable object files at runtime and
use their definition without relocating or relinking the SXEmacs
binary.  The purpose (and main motivation) therefore clearly is to
supply elisp programmers with a convenient way to implement features
from underlying libraries without even touching the C level.

  The @FFI{} feature itself must be considered experimental, though.
It is a lot of effort to secure raw library calls from misuse,
especially because the SXEmacs error handler has no influence on the
events triggered inside of the foreign library.  On the other hand,
keeping foreign function calls under exhaustive surveillance would
noticably slow down the @FFI{}, if not even limit the capabilities at
all.

@menu
* Basic C Types and Functions::	Default type and function bindings
				  from the Standard C library (libc)
* Calling Foreign Functions::	How to call functions defined in an
				  external library.
* Examining and Modifying::	How to examine and modify foreign
				  objects.
* User-Defined Types::		How to reflect custom type definitions
				  in an external library.
* ffi-curl::			FFI-bindings for the libcurl library.
* ffi-wand::			FFI-bindings for the libWand library.
@end menu


@node Basic C Types and Functions
@section Basic C Types and Functions

  In order to provide a convenient way to access the standard C
library (libc), FFI comes with a set of predefined types and
functions.  Of course, you can access other functions and define other
types beside the ones in libc.  The discussion here is intended to be
a basic introduction to FFI.  To use a specific library see the more
general sections @ref{Calling Foreign Functions} and @ref{User-Defined
Types}.

@menu
* Predefined FFI data types::	A list of predefined, ready-to-go
				  types provided by FFI.
* The pointer form::	A type modifier to reference data.
* The function form::	A type modifier to reference functions.
* The array form::	A type modifier to specify arrays.
* The union form::	A type modifier to specify unions.
* The struct form::	A type modifier to specify stuctures.
* The c-data form::	A type modifier to specify memory blocks.
* FFI type-related functions::	Functions to gather information on types.
@end menu

@node Predefined FFI data types
@subsection Predefined FFI data types

  The following assortment lists all predefined C data types.  These
types are also known as Basic FFI types.  We assume these to be well
known and do not explain them further.

@itemize
@item
@code{byte}, @code{unsigned byte}
@item
@code{char}, @code{unsigned-char}
@item
@code{short}, @code{unsigned-short}
@item
@code{int}, @code{unsigned-int}
@item
@code{long}, @code{unsigned-long}
@item
@code{float},
@item
@code{double}
@item
@code{void}
@item
@code{c-string}
@item
@code{c-data}
@end itemize

  As with C data types, the actual meaning of these types depends on
the system architecture, but there is no difference between these FFI
predefined types and their C-pendant if FFI is run on the same
machine.

  However, the last two types in the list are special in that they are
actually a @code{(pointer char)} (in C known as @samp{char*}), but (as
the name suggests) data of this type form a string on C level, or
arbitrary chunks of (bytewise-oriented) data which is translated to or
translated from an ordinary emacs string.  In constrast, we should
mention that the @samp{char*} is actually solely a pointer to one
character, and @emph{not} a string a priori.

  In order to handle arbitrary binary data blocks, the type
@code{c-data} can be used in conjunction with a size parameter (see
The @code{c-data} form).  Strings -- the internal representation
of data of this type -- are (re-)encoded to @code{binary} (i.e. the
generic binary coding system) due to Mule issues.


@node The pointer form
@subsection The @code{pointer} form
@cindex pointer FFI type-modifier

  As mentioned in the previous section, every data type can be
pointerised, that is create another FFI-object with the address of the
data (not the data itself).  We say such data @dfn{point to} other
data.

  The syntax for this is the form @code{'(pointer @var{data-type})},
so for example the FFI-type @code{'(pointer int)} is the data type
@samp{int*} in C.


@node The function form
@subsection The @code{function} form
@cindex function FFI type-modifier

  In addition to pointerised data, there is a special type modifier to
represent function signatures.  Such type-cells are needed to declare
function objects.

  The syntax for this is the form @code{'(function @var{return-type}
@var{arg1-type} @dots{} @var{argn-type})}, so for example
the FFI-type @code{'(function int int unsigned-int)} would be
rewritten in C as @samp{int some_undefined_name(int, unsigned int)}.

  The return type and at least one argument type are mandatory!  So
the syntax for functions without return values, i.e. procedures, is to
pass the type @samp{void} as return type.  Similarly, pass a
@samp{void} as arg1-type for functions without arguments.


@node The array form
@subsection The @code{array} form
@cindex array FFI type-modifier

  Arrays in general are finite, indexed sets of unityped data.  That
is (informally), a contiguous piece of memory with data slots, where
the data slots all have the same type and are enumerated from 0 to
@code{size-1}.  Accessing a certain slot is achieved by passing its
slot number to the accessor function.

  The syntax for this type-modification is the form
@code{'(array @var{type} @var{size})}, with size being a positive
integer.  For example the FFI-type @code{'(array int 20)} would be
equivalent to the C-syntax @samp{int some_undefined_name[20]}.


@node The union form
@subsection The @code{union} form
@cindex union FFI type-modifier

  Unions in general are mutually exclusive variants of data types
which are united into a super-type.  More formally, the data in a
union is a component projection of a product of many types.
Informally, the union is a choice of one datum and (with it) one type
at a time out of many ones.  Unions are arranged by named slots of
different types.  The slots are accessed by their names.

@noindent
The syntax for this type-modification is the form:
@example
'(union @var{name}
  (@var{slot-name1} @var{type1})
  @dots{}
  (@var{slot-namen} @var{typen}))
@end example


@node The struct form
@subsection The @code{struct} form
@cindex struct FFI type-modifier

  Structures in general are products of other types.  Structures
consist of named data slots of different types.  The slots are
accessed by their names.

@noindent
The syntax for this type-modification is the form:
@example
'(struct @var{name}
  (@var{slot-name1} @var{type1})
  @dots{}
  (@var{slot-namen} @var{typen}))
@end example


@node The c-data form
@subsection The @code{c-data} form

  C-data in general is hard to describe, it is everything which is a
contiguous piece of memory, called a block of memory.  Data of this
type is represented byte-wise, the internal representation is an emacs
string encoded as @code{binary}.

  The syntax is a cons-cell with the symbol @code{c-data} in the car
and a non-negative integer in the cdr.  For a (yet) unknown length of
a data block one can simply use the non-cons'd version @code{'c-data}.

@example
@group
;; block of 40 bytes of arbitrary data
'(c-data . 40)
@end group
@group
;; indefinite block of data
'c-data
@end group
@end example

@c   The @code{unknown} symbol may be used if the size of a memory block
@c is yet unknown or may vary.  Fetching data from or pumping data to an
@c indefinitely sized foreign object is not possible.  Instead, the
@c object should be type-cast for reading and writing operations.


@node FFI type-related functions
@subsection FFI type-related functions

@c probably we should unify our documentation, sometimes it's `foreign
@c type' sometimes it's `FFI type' etc.

@defun ffi-basic-type-p type
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{type} is a basic FFI type.

A type is said to be basic, if it is neither a pointer nor a
function, and there is a corresponding built-in type in C.
@end defun

@defun ffi-type-p type &optional signal-p
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{type} is a valid FFI type.
If optional argument @var{signal-p} is non-@code{nil} and @var{type}
is not an FFI type, additionally signal an error.
@end defun

@defvar ffi-type-checker [defaults to: @code{ffi-type-p}]
Function to call when the validity of an FFI type shall be checked.
@end defvar

@defvar ffi-named-types
Alist of named FFI types with elements of the form
@code{(NAME . FFI-TYPE)}.
@end defvar

@defun ffi-size-of-type type
Return the size of the foreign type @var{type}.

Valid foreign types are: @samp{byte}, @samp{unsigned-byte},
@samp{char}, @samp{unsigned-char}, @samp{short},
@samp{unsigned-short}, @samp{int}, @samp{unsigned-int}, @samp{long},
@samp{unsigned-long}, @samp{pointer-void}, @samp{float},
@samp{double}, @samp{object}, and @samp{c-string}.
@end defun

@defun ffi-fixup-type type
Return FFI type @var{type} in a canonical form.
@end defun

@defun ffi-set-storage-size fo size
Set the size of the allocated space of @var{fo} to @var{size}.
@end defun



@node Calling Foreign Functions
@section Calling Foreign Functions

  Calling FFI functions is a many-step process.  The actual call of an
external function is the last step in this chain but can be done
repeatedly and almost as comfortable as elisp function calls
thenceforth.  The chain to FFI function calls can be summed up as
following.

@enumerate
@item
incorporate external library contents
@item
declare function signatures
@item
initialise function arguments
@item
call the function
@end enumerate

  Hereby, step 1 is independent from the other steps.  It can be
interchanged with the other steps arbitrarily, but is mandatory at
all.

@subsection Incorporate External Library Contents

@defun ffi-load libname
Load library @var{libname}.
Return a foreign object handle if successful, or indicate an error if
the library cannot be loaded.

The argument @var{libname} should be the file-name string of a shared
object library (usual extension is @file{.so}).

The library should reside in one of the directories specified by the
@var{$LD_LIBRARY_PATH} environment variable or the more global
@file{ld.so.cache}.
@end defun

  Note you cannot simply modify the @file{ld.so.cache}, instead use the
command @code{ldconfig} on a suited configuration file.  See your
vendor's documentation how to do that.

  Loading a library using @code{ffi-load} additionally registers this
library in a list of already loaded libraries.

@defvar ffi-loaded-libraries
Alist of loaded libraries with elements of the form @code{(LIB-NAME . FFIO)}.
@end defvar

  There is a raw library loader function without the registration code
and without error handling.  However, it is highly suggested to use
@code{ffi-load} exclusively.

@defun ffi-load-library libname
Load library @var{libname}.
Return a foreign object handle if successful, or @code{nil} if the
library cannot be loaded.

The argument @var{libname} should be the file-name string of a shared
object library (usual extension is @file{.so}).

The library should reside in one of the directories specified by the
@var{$LD_LIBRARY_PATH} environment variable or the more global
@file{ld.so.cache}.
@end defun

  The following example (like all other examples in this section) is
taken from @file{ffi-curl.el} which comes with the SXEmacs
distribution.  We assume the library @file{libcurl.so} to exist and to
reside in a directory searched by the dynamic loader.

@example
(ffi-load "libcurl.so")
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=(pointer void) size=4 fotype=2
     foptr=0x8a1dad8>
ffi-loaded-libraries
     @result{} (("libcurl.so" . #<ffiobject type=(pointer void) size=4 fotype=2 foptr=0x8a1dad8>))
@end example


@subsection Declaring Function Signatures

  Declaring the signature of a function is quite like reading a
library's include file.  The main function to achieve this is
@code{ffi-defun}.

@defun ffi-defun type sym
Make and return a foreign object of type @var{type} and bind it to the
external symbol @var{sym}.

The argument @var{type} should be a function type-cell.
The argument @var{sym} should be a string naming a function in one of
the loaded libraries.

If @var{sym} does not exist in any of the loaded libraries, an error
is indicated.

This is like @code{ffi-bind} but for function objects.
@end defun

  On the other hand, a library may contain useful variables.  The main
directive to bind such variable objects is @code{ffi-bind}.

@defun ffi-bind type sym
Make and return a foreign object of type @var{type} and bind it to the
external symbol @var{sym}.

The argument @var{type} can be any type-cell.
The argument @var{sym} should be a string naming an arbitrary symbol
in one of the loaded libraries.

If @var{sym} does not exist in any of the loaded libraries, @code{nil}
is returned.
@end defun

@noindent
Again, let's look at an example taken from @file{ffi-curl.el}

@example
(setq curl:curl_easy_getinfo
      (ffi-defun '(function int (pointer void) int) "curl_easy_getinfo"))
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=(function int (pointer void) int) size=4 fotype=3 foptr=0x40bfa370>
@end example

@noindent
The @code{ffi-bind} function works similarly.


@subsection Initialising Function Arguments

  As seen in the previous example, external objects are assigned an
(elisp-)internal object which refers to them.  Following this
abstraction process, it is kind of obvious that arguments for external
functions cannot be passed as internal elisp objects, but have to be
converted somehow.

  The most user-friendly function to accomplish this task is
@code{ffi-create-fo}, although it cannot catch all the cases
(especially compound types are missing as of November 2005).

@defun ffi-create-fo type val
Create a foreign object of type @var{type} and set its value to
@var{val}.  Return created FFI object.
@end defun

  Note that memory allocation and other administrative tasks are
entirely performed within the FFI API without involving the user.
That is why we can simply ``convert'' an elisp string to a C string,
as the example below will demonstrate.

@example
@group
(ffi-create-fo 'c-string "foobar")
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=c-string size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x88e3fdc>
@end group
@group
(ffi-create-fo 'unsigned-int 2299)
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=unsigned-int size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x89f648c>
@end group
@end example

  The function @code{ffi-create-fo} is written in lisp and decomposes
to more elementary functions.  We are going to discuss them here
flatly since they provide a more sophisticated basis for the handling
of foreign objects.

@defun make-ffi-object type &optional size
Create a new FFI object of type @var{type}.
If optional argument @var{size} is non-@code{nil} it should be an
integer, in this case additional storage size to hold data of at
least length @var{size} is allocated.
@end defun

@defun ffi-set fo val
Set @var{fo}'s foreign value to @var{val}.
@end defun

  Note that currently @code{ffi-set} does @emph{not} work on compound
data types, nevertheless there are workaround functions.

  The following example will demonstrate the use of
@code{make-ffi-object} and, in conjunction, @code{ffi-set}.

@example
@group
(setq xmpl-fo (make-ffi-object 'long))
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=long size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x8937dcc>
(ffi-set xmpl-fo 20000)
     @result{} 20000
xmpl-fo
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=long size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x8937dcc>
@end group

@group
(setq xmpl-fo (make-ffi-object 'c-string))
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=c-string size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x890158c>
(ffi-set xmpl-fo "some test string")
     @result{} "some test string"
xmpl-fo
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=c-string size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x890158c>
(ffi-get xmpl-fo)
     @result{} "some test string"
@end group
@end example

  After using @code{make-ffi-object} to create foreign objects,
@emph{always} make sure that these were assigned a value before
requesting the object's data, or simply always use
@code{ffi-create-fo}.  In the former case, FFI does not initialise the
object with default data, its value is therefore indefinite and may
cause a crash of SXEmacs when queried.

  Also, check carefully to only assign data which is suited for the
underlying C type.  Passing, for example, strings to
@samp{unsigned-int}s or @samp{long} values to an object of type
@samp{int} may not only result in unexpected behaviour but almost
certainly a crash.

  Like @code{ffi-create-fo} the function @code{ffi-set} is a higher
level lisp binding.  It decomposes into several raw FFI API functions
which are presented here just for completeness.  It is highly advised
to exclusively use @code{ffi-set}.

@defun ffi-store fo offset val-type val
Store and return the value @var{val} of type @var{val-type} in
@var{fo}'s foreign space at @var{offset}.

@var{val-type} can be either a basic FFI type or an FFI pointer.
If @var{val-type} is a basic FFI type, then @var{val} can be an
ordinary, but suitable Emacs lisp object.
If @var{val-type} is an FFI pointer then @var{val} @emph{must} be an
FFI object of the underlying type pointed to.
@end defun


@subsection Calling Functions

  Now that function signatures are bound and argument data is
initialised, we can dare to actually apply functions and operations on
our data.  The main function to achieve this is
@code{ffi-call-function}.

@defun ffi-call-function fo &rest args
Call a function referred to by @var{fo} with arguments @var{args},
maybe return a foreign object with the result or @code{nil} if there
is none.

@var{fo} should be a binding initiated by @code{ffi-defun}, and
@var{args} should be foreign data objects or pointers to these.
@end defun

  Unlike with most Emacs lisp functional bindings foreign functions
can be called by reference, this means a function may be passed a
foreign object as argument and the function's result will reside in
that foreign object.

  Before we come to an example, we shall discuss two further functions
which ``re-convert'' foreign object data to internal Emacs lisp data.

@defun ffi-get fo &keys type off
Return @var{fo}'s value (converted to Emacs lisp compliant form).

Optional key @var{:type} may be used to cast @var{fo} to @var{:type},
it defaults to the object's assigned type.
Optional key @var{:off} may be used to specify an offset, it defaults
to 0.
@end defun

  The backbone function of @code{ffi-get} is @code{ffi-fetch}, but it
is highly advised to exclusively use @code{ffi-get}, which in contrast
also works for structs, arrays and pointers.

@defun ffi-fetch fo offset type
Return @var{fo}'s value (converted to Emacs lisp compliant form).
@var{fo} is cast to @var{type}, and the value is aligned to
@var{offset}.
@end defun


@noindent
Let us now look at the promised example.

@example
(ffi-load "libcurl.so")
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=(pointer void) size=4 fotype=2 foptr=0x8a1cc78>

;; we want: char *curl_escape(const char *string, int length);
;; this function takes a usual string and returns a version suitable
;; as URI
(setq curl:curl_escape
      (ffi-defun '(function c-string c-string int) "curl_escape"))
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=(function c-string c-string int) size=4 fotype=3 foptr=0x40bf2e50>

;; now prepare the funcall
(let* ((url "http://foo.org/please escape this<$!=3>")
       (str (ffi-create-fo 'c-string url))
       (len (ffi-create-fo 'int (length url))))
  ;; call the function
  (setq result (ffi-call-function curl:curl_escape str len)))
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=c-string size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x8906af8>

;; now let's see what the escaped form is
(ffi-get result)
     @result{} "http%3A%2F%2Ffoo%2Eorg%2Fplease%20escape%20this%3C%24%21%3D3%3E"

;; and compare to
(ffi-get result :off 13)
     @result{} "foo%2Eorg%2Fplease%20escape%20this%3C%24%21%3D3%3E"

;; and to
(ffi-get result :type 'char)
     @result{} ?h
@end example


@c   The whole procedure of binding foreign function objects can be
@c abbreviated using the macro @code{define-ffi-function}.
@c
@c @c all in one macro
@c @defvr Macro define-ffi-function fsym args doc-string ftype ename
@c
@c @end defvr



@node Examining and Modifying
@section Examining and Modifying Foreign Objects

  In this section we give a quick overview of what else can be done
with foreign objects or foreign function definitions.

@c on objects and their types
@defun ffi-object-p fo
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{fo} is an FFI object, nil otherwise.
@end defun
@defun ffi-object-type fo
Return @var{fo}'s type.
@end defun
@defun ffi-set-object-type fo type
Cast @var{fo} to type @var{type} and reassign the cast value.
@end defun

@c on objects and their data
@defun ffi-object-size fo
Return the size of the allocated space of @var{fo}.
@end defun

@defun ffi-set-storage-size fo size
Set the size of the allocated space of @var{fo} to @var{size}.
@end defun

@defun ffi-address-of fo
Return the FFI object that stores address of given FFI object
@var{fo}.

This is the equivalent of the @samp{&} operator in C.
@end defun
@defun ffi-deref fo-pointer
Return the data @var{fo-pointer} points to.

This is the equivalent of the `*' operator in C.
@end defun
@defun ffi-null-p fo
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{fo} is a null pointer, @code{nil}
otherwise.
Non-@code{nil} may be returned only for pointer types or the type
@samp{c-string}.
@end defun
@defun ffi-null-pointer
Return the FFI object that represents a null pointer.

This is the equivalent of @samp{NULL} in C.
@end defun


  For foreign arrays, unions and structures, there are accessor
functions to modify or fetch portions in the foreign object:

@c on foreign arrays
@defun ffi-aref farray idx
Return the element of @var{farray} at index @var{idx}.
The slot enumeration starts at 0.
@end defun
@defun ffi-aset farray idx value
Store the element @var{value} in @var{farray} at index @var{idx}.
The slot enumeration starts at 0.
@end defun

@defun ffi-slot-offset type slot
Return the offset of @var{slot} in @var{type}.
@var{slot} can be either a valid (named) slot in @var{type} or
@code{nil}.
If @var{slot} is @code{nil} return the size of the structure.
@end defun

@example
(define-ffi-type mystruct
  (struct foo
   (bar int)
   (hey char)
   (baz c-string)))
(ffi-slot-offset 'mystruct 'baz)
     @result{} 8
@end example


@c @defun ffi-dlerror
@c @end defun
@c
@c @defun ffi-plist
@c @end defun



@node User-Defined Types
@section User-Defined Types
@cindex user-defined types

  As usual in most libraries written in C, objects carry an abstract
type.  These abstract types can be aliases for the built-in ones,
@samp{struct}s or @samp{union}s composed by more atomic types.

  For the bare aliasing of types, there is a macro
@code{define-ffi-type}, which can also be used to construct unions, as
well as arrays.

@defvr Macro define-ffi-type name type
Associate @var{name} with FFI @var{type}.  When defining global
structures or unions, @var{name} may be @code{nil}, in that case
@var{name} is derived from the name of @var{type}.
@end defvr

@example
(define-ffi-type mytype unsigned-long)
     @result{} mytype
@end example

  Once a type is defined that way, it can be used as if it was a
native C-type.

@example
(ffi-type-p 'mytype)
     @result{} t
(ffi-size-of-type 'mytype)
     @result{} 4
@end example

@noindent
As mentioned above, we look at the construction of arrays now.

@example
(define-ffi-type myarray (array unsigned-long 8))
     @result{} myarray
(ffi-size-of-type 'myarray)
     @result{} 32
@end example

  Similarly, unions and structs can be defined.  For structs, however,
there exists a more dedicated definition function,
@code{define-ffi-struct}.  This function also defines setter and
getter forms which can be used to selectively set or get the slots in
a structure.

  Getting the value of a slot in a structure defined that way can be
done with a function @code{@var{structname}->@var{slotname}}.  Setting
values is achieved by using @code{setf} on
@code{@var{structname}->@var{slotname}}.

@defvr Macro define-ffi-struct name &rest slots
Define a new structure of NAME and SLOTS.
@end defvr

@example
(define-ffi-struct foo (sl1 unsigned-int) (sl2 char) (sl3 int))
     @result{} (lambda (obj) "
Common Lisp lambda list:
  (foo->sl3 OBJ)

" (block foo->sl3 (let* ((--obj--temp-- (gensym "--obj--"))
(--nv--temp-- (gensym "--nv--"))) (list (list --obj--temp--) (list
obj) (list --nv--temp--) (let* ((obj --obj--temp--) (nv --nv--temp--))
(list (quote ffi-store) obj (list (quote ffi-slot-offset) (quote
(quote foo)) (quote (quote sl3))) (list (quote ffi-slot-type) (quote
(quote foo)) (quote (quote sl3))) nv)) (list (quote foo->sl3)
--obj--temp--)))))
(fboundp #'foo->sl1)
     @result{} t
(fboundp #'foo->sl2)
     @result{} t
(fboundp #'foo->sl2)
     @result{} t
@end example


@subsection Enumerations
@cindex enumerations

A special case of user-defined data are so called enumerations.
Basically they are used to simultaneously define a large block of
aliases.  These are enumerated (beginning from 0) and are replaced by
the according integers during the preprocessor time.

For convenience the SXEmacs FFI interface provides a similar
functionality.

@defvr Macro ffi-enum name &optional docstring &rest specs
Define an enumeration @var{name}.
Optional argument @var{docstring} is a documentation string.

@var{specs} can be an arbitrary number of symbols which will be
enumerated in the respective order.

Additionally the cells of @var{specs} may look like

@samp{  foo = bar}

to adhere a symbol @samp{foo} to the enumeration with the value of the
symbol @samp{bar} (i.e. @samp{foo} is an alias of @samp{bar}).

Moreover, it is possible to set the counter explicitly:

@samp{  baz = 5}

would assign a value of 5 to the symbol @samp{baz} and (by side-effect)
set the counter to 6 for the next symbol.

The defined enumeration will result in a (@code{defconst}'d) variable
@code{name}, the value is an alist of the form

@samp{  ((symbol . value) ...)},

where @samp{value} is the C-value of @samp{symbol}.

Furthermore, two functions (named @code{@var{name}} and
@code{@var{name}-value}) will be defined.  The first one is a simple
lookup function returning the C-value of a passed symbol.  The second
does basically the same but returns the representing (elisp) integer of
a symbol.  Both functions return @code{nil} if the symbol is not in the
enumeration.
@end defvr





@node ffi-curl
@section FFI-bindings for libcurl
@cindex ffi-curl.el
@cindex libcurl

  The next passages introduce bindings defined on top of the current
FFI implementation.  To conceal the poorly conceived documentation of
FFI itself we strongly advertise to work out the whole power of FFI by
these example application.

  cURL is a command line tool for transferring files with URL syntax,
supporting FTP, FTPS, TFTP, HTTP, HTTPS, GOPHER, TELNET, DICT, FILE
and LDAP.  cURL supports HTTPS certificates, HTTP POST, HTTP PUT, FTP
uploading, HTTP form based upload, proxies, cookies, user+password
authentication (Basic, Digest, NTLM, Negotiate, kerberos, @dots{}), file
transfer resume, proxy tunneling and a busload of other useful tricks.

  The cURL-API is, like cURL itself, free and open software.  The main
entrance to cURL is the curl-easy interface, which ffi-curl.el intends
to implement.

  The FFI-bindings for libcurl can be classified roughly into guts and
main procedures (there is actually only one main procedure).  However,
we discuss the guts of the API now.

@subsection Low-level functions of @file{ffi-curl.el}

  As usual, the function's communication takes place via contextes,
hence any of the cURL functions expect a context handle which is
initially produced by @code{curl:easy-init}.

@defun curl:easy-init
Initialise curl easy interface and return a context handle.
@end defun

@defun curl:easy-cleanup ctx
Clean up context @var{ctx} and free resources allocated with it.
This function must be called after every easy session.
@end defun

@noindent
Remember to always free all requested context handles.  The garbage
collector of SXEmacs has no influence on them nor on their allocated
memory.

@example
(let ((context (curl:easy-init)))
  (curl:easy-cleanup context))
     @result{} nil
@end example


  Having allocated a context handle all cURL functions use it by
reference, that is functions change it by side-effect or magically
retrieve values from it.

@defun curl:easy-setopt ctx &rest options
Set @var{options} for curl transfer in session @var{ctx}.

Options are passed as keyword-value-pairs. Supported keywords are:
@itemize
@item
@code{:url} @samp{string} --
a valid Uniform Resource Locator.
@item
@code{:fstream} @samp{ffi-fo} --
a file descriptor to which output is redirected.
@item
@end itemize
@end defun

@defun curl:easy-perform ctx
Perform cURL operation on the context @var{ctx}.

To control the behaviour of the session or set options into the
context, see @code{curl:easy-setopt}.
@end defun

@defun curl:easy-getinfo ctx what
Get info from the context @var{ctx} about @var{what}.
@end defun

@defvr Constant curl:errors-alist
Alist of error codes and associated clear-text error messages.
@end defvr


@subsection User-level functions of @file{ffi-curl.el}

  All of the prior routines have been used to define a user-level
function which can be used without the need to deal with the
internals.

@defun curl:download url file &rest options
Download the contents @var{url} to and write them to @var{file}.
Return 0 on success or an integer specifying an error code.

Optionally you can specify keywords in @var{options}.
The options are keyword-value-pairs and are set via
@code{curl:easy-setopt}.
@end defun

@example
(curl:download "http://www.sxemacs.org"
  (expand-file-name (make-temp-name "curl") (temp-directory)))
     @result{} 0
@end example



@node ffi-wand
@section FFI-bindings for libWand
@cindex ffi-wand.el
@cindex libWand

  The libWand library is the proposed API to the ImageMagick core.
Depending on the configuration of ImageMagick it supports many, many
different file formats for input and output and comes along with a
powerful set of image manipulation commands.

  Just like the bindings for libcurl the libWand bindings can be
roughly classified into user-level functions and commands, currently
there is only one command in this class, and low-level API calls.

@subsection Low-level functions of @file{ffi-wand.el}

@c @defvr FFI-type MagickWand
@c A context.
@c
@c An alias for '(pointer void).
@c @end defvr
@c
@c @defvr FFI-type MagickBooleanType
@c A boolean type for function return values.
@c
@c An alias for 'long.
@c @end defvr
@c
@c @defvr FFI-type MagickStorageType
@c Type for the enumeration of storage methods.
@c
@c An alias for 'unsigned-long.
@c @end defvr
@c
@c @defvr FFI-type MagickChannelType
@c Type for the enumeration of channels.
@c
@c An alias for 'unsigned-long.
@c @end defvr

@noindent
Let us begin with context handlers.

@defun Wand:make-wand
Return a newly allocated MagickWand (the context handle of libWand).
@end defun

@defun Wand:clear-wand wand
Clear all resources associated with the @var{wand}.
This does not free the memory, i.e. @var{wand} can furtherly be used
as a context, see @code{Wand:delete-wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:copy-wand wand
Return a cloned copy of @var{wand}.
This duplicates everything necessary to get an exact, but independent
clone of @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:delete-wand wand
Delete the @var{wand}.
This frees all resources associated with the @var{wand}.

WARNING: Do not use @var{wand} after calling this function!
@end defun

@defun Wand:wandp wand
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{wand} is a magick wand, @code{nil}
otherwise.
@end defun

@example
(setq foo (Wand:make-wand))
     @result{} #<ffiobject type=MagickWand size=4 fotype=0 foptr=0x8b38350>
(Wand:wandp foo)
     @result{} t
(Wand:delete-wand foo)
     @result{} nil
(Wand:wandp foo)
     @result{} nil
@end example


@subsection Input/Output functions of Wand context handles

@noindent
Now here is an assortment of functions which operate on a Wand.

@c input/output
@defun Wand:read-image wand file
Read @var{file} and associate it with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:write-image wand file
Write the image associated with @var{wand} to @var{file}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:display-image wand
Display the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:get-image-pixels-internal wand from-width from-height delta-width delta-height
Return a raw string of image pixel data (RGB triples).
@end defun

@defun Wand:get-image-pixels wand
Return a raw string of image pixel data (RGB triples).
@end defun


@subsection Image geometry and canvas functions

@c geometry and canvas
@defun Wand:get-image-height wand
Return the height of the image in @var{wand} in pixels.
@end defun
@defun Wand:get-image-width wand
Return the width of the image in @var{wand} in pixels.
@end defun

@defun Wand:scale-image wand width height
Scale the image in @var{wand} to the dimensions @var{width} times
@var{height}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:crop-image wand x y dx dy
Crop to the rectangle spanned at coordinates (@var{x}, @var{y}) by
width @var{dx} and height @var{dy} in the image associated with
@var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:flip-image wand
Mirror the image associated with @var{wand} around the x-axis.
@end defun
@defun Wand:flop-image wand
Mirror the image associated with @var{wand} around the y-axis.
@end defun

@defun Wand:roll-image wand x y
Rolls (offsets) the image associated with @var{wand} to an offset of
@var{x} and @var{y}.
@end defun


@subsection Image refinement functions

@c image improvements
@defun Wand:increase-contrast-image wand
Increase the contrast of the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun
@defun Wand:decrease-contrast-image wand
Decrease the contrast of the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:despeckle-image wand
Reduce the speckle noise in the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:enhance-image wand
Enhance the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:equalize-image wand
Equalise the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:normalize-image wand
Normalise the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:reduce-noise-image wand radius
Reduce the noise in the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun


@defun Wand:posterize-image wand levels &optional ditherp
Posterize the image associated with @var{wand},
that is quantise the range of used colours to at most @var{levels}.
If optional argument @var{ditherp} is non-@code{nil} use a dithering
effect to wipe hard contrasts.
@end defun

@defun Wand:gamma-image wand level
Perform gamma correction on the image associated with @var{wand}.
The argument @var{level} is a positive float, a value of 1.00
(read 100%) is a no-op.
@end defun

@defun Wand:median-filter-image wand radius
Perform median normalisation of the pixels in the image associated
with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:solarize-image wand threshold
Solarise the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:modulate-image wand brightness saturation hue
Tweak the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun

@defun Wand:negate-image wand &optional greyp
Perform negation on the image associated with @var{wand}.
@end defun


@subsection Image effects functions

@c effects
@defun Wand:charcoal-image wand radius sigma
Simulate a charcoal drawing of the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
The @var{sigma} argument is a float and defines a derivation.
@end defun

@defun Wand:oil-paint-image wand radius
Simulate oil-painting of image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
@end defun

@defun Wand:edge-image wand radius
Enhance the edges of the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
@end defun

@defun Wand:emboss-image wand radius sigma
Emboss the image associated with @var{wand} (a relief effect).
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
The @var{sigma} argument is a float and defines a derivation.
@end defun

@defun Wand:wave-image wand amplitude wavelength
Create a ripple effect on the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{amplitude} argument is a float and defines the how large
waves are.
The @var{wavelength} argument is a float and defines how often the
waves occur.
@end defun


@subsection Image blurring and sharpening functions

@c blurs
@defun Wand:blur-image wand radius sigma
Blur the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
The @var{sigma} argument is a float and defines a derivation.
@end defun

@defun Wand:gaussian-blur-image wand radius sigma
Blur the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
The @var{sigma} argument is a float and defines a derivation.
@end defun

@defun Wand:motion-blur-image wand radius sigma angle
Blur the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
The @var{sigma} argument is a float and defines a derivation.
The @var{angle} argument is a float and measured in degrees.
@end defun

@defun Wand:radial-blur-image wand angle
Blur the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{angle} argument is a float and measured in degrees.
@end defun

@defun Wand:sharpen-image wand radius sigma
Sharpen the image associated with @var{wand}.
The @var{radius} argument is a float and measured in pixels.
The @var{sigma} argument is a float and defines a derivation.
@end defun

@defun Wand:unsharp-mask-image wand radius sigma amount threshold
Sharpen the image associated with @var{wand} using an unsharp mask.
The unsharp mask is defined by @var{radius} and @var{sigma} (defined
as in @code{Wand:blur-image}).
The strength of sharpening is controlled by @var{amount} and
@var{threshold}.
@end defun



@subsection User-level functions of @file{ffi-wand.el}

  Mostly, for demonstration purposes, there are two functions which
are claimed to be suitable for user interaction.  The only operations
they perform are reading an image file, rescaling it to fit into the
window, glyphifying it and to insert that glyph into a buffer.

@defun Wand:show-image-file-here file
Insert a glyph with the image from @var{file} at current point,
scale image to fit the buffer window if necessary.
@end defun

@defun Wand:show-image-file file
Insert a glyph with the image from @var{file} in a dedicated buffer,
scale image to fit the buffer window if necessary.
@end defun



@c ffi.texi ends here
