@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the SXEmacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2005, 2006 Sebastian Freundt <hroptatyr@sxemacs.org>
@c See the file lispref.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../../info/media.info

@node Media, Hash Tables, Display, Top
@chapter Handling Media

  This chapter describes a number of other features related to dealing
with media streams (such as audio or video).

  Because SXEmacs' developers are lazy guys, or just annoyed to
re-invent a wheel, the current media facilities require a heap of other
libraries which themselves depend on more atomic libraries and so
forth.

@menu
* Prerequisites::		External library dependencies.
* Media Streams::		The concept of media streams.
* Audio Devices::		Audio output facilities.
* Media Threads::		Plugging a stream to an output device.
@end menu



@node Prerequisites
@section Prerequisites --- What do I need to start?

  In order to use MM features with SXEmacs you need at least two
libraries.  One of which is responsible for handling different types of
media files, that is parses them, demuxes them and decodes them to a raw
form suitable for your audio hardware.  The other library cares for the
actual audio output, that is takes some raw audio data and feeds it to
your speakers (or somewhere else).

@noindent
In the land of ASCII-arts diagrams this would translate to:
@example
+------------+   +-----------+   +-------------+  +------------+
| media file |   | media lib |   |   SXEmacs   |  | audio lib  |
|------------|-->|-----------|-->|-------------|->|------------|->...
| e.g.       |   | parser    |   | bind to var |  | connect to |
| .wav  .mp3 |   | demuxer   |   | start/stop  |  | soundcard  |
| .ogg  .mka |   | decoder   |   |             |  | and play   |
+------------+   +-----------+   +-------------+  +------------+
@end example

  As can be seen, MM features will not work if either a media lib or an
audio lib is missing.  SXEmacs supports a bunch of libraries in either
category.  We discuss the supported audio libraries, their properties
and their availability first, afterwards we discuss the different media
handling libraries.

@noindent
@iftex
 {@bf The developers' recommendation is clearly to choose PulseAudio
 as the audio library and FFmpeg as media library.}
@end iftex
@ifinfo
The developers' recommendation is clearly to choose PulseAudio as the
audio library and FFmpeg as media library!
@end ifinfo

@subsection Audio Library: OSS (Open Sound System)

@itemize
@item Availability: Linux and BSD systems only; ships with the linux kernel
@item Dependencies: none
@item Download:

@url{http://www.kernel.org}

@item Pros: easy consistent interface
@item Cons: old, ugly, depends too much on hardware
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

Since OSS was one of the most widespread architectures for audio many of
the new generation audio infrastructures support OSS with at least a
compatibility layer.  For instance PulseAudio provides a tool
@samp{padsp}, and Esound calls it @samp{esddsp}. All these are 
intended to provide an OSS device emulation for applications which 
only speak OSS.  All read/write accesses are rerouted to the 
respective audio server.


@subsection Audio Library: NAS (Network Audio System)

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: X, OSS
@item Webpage: @url{http://nas.codebrilliance.com/}
@item Download:

@url{http://nas.codebrilliance.com/nas/nas-1.8.src.tar.gz}

@item Pros: device independent, network-mode possible, mixing possible,
small
@item Cons: integrates to X, not recent, not very configurable
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

NAS was one of the audio systems which seized the concept of
X-Forwarding for audio data.  Hence its name.  However, large parts of
NAS depend on X which disqualifies it for non-local or tty-only use.


@subsection Audio Library: ESD (the enlightenment sound daemon)

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: libaudiofile; optional: ALSA
@item Webpage: @url{http://developer.gnome.org/doc/whitepapers/esd/}
@item Download:

@url{ftp://ftp.gnome.org/pub/gnome/sources/esound/0.2/esound-0.2.36.tar.bz2}

@item Pros:
device independent (if used with ALSA),
network-mode possible, mixing possible, small
@item Cons:
high latency, not recent, not very configurable
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

Esound is a more decoupled approach but similar to NAS.  Furthermore,
it provides transparent mixing facilities, applications just connect
to the Esound daemon and transfer the stream data, esd itself will
downmix the parallel streams and send it to the local sound
card. Hence it is well suited for local and network use.


@subsection Audio Library: PulseAudio (formerly known as PolypAudio)

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: OSS, liboil, samplerate, libatomic_ops;
optional: ALSA, libasyncns, sndfile
@item Webpage: @url{http://pulseaudio.org/}
@item Download:

@url{http://0pointer.de/lennart/projects/pulseaudio/pulseaudio-0.9.5.tar.gz}

@url{svn co svn://0pointer.de/pulseaudio/trunk pulseaudio}

@item Pros:
device independent (if used with ALSA),
network-mode possible, mixing possible, multiple inputs, multiple
outputs, low latency, very configurable, @emph{developers' choice}
@item Cons:
unstable with many simultaneous connections
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

PulseAudio is one of the most advanced new-generation audio servers.
It is modular, supports local and network connections, provides
transparent downmixing of incoming streams (like esd) and is fully
compatible to esd.  Furthermore, you can use sound in both directions,
i.e. record from pulse sources.  Pulse provides modules to not only
directly attach to local hardware but also to other remotely running
pulses or other running audio servers (like jack, esd, etc.).


@subsection Audio Library: Jack (a low-latency audio server)

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: ALSA
@item Webpage: @url{http://jackit.sourceforge.net/}
@item Download:

@url{http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/jackit/},

@url{cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anonymous@@cvs.sourceforge.net:/cvsroot/jackit co jack}

@item Pros:
high accuracy, extreme low latency, device independent, mixing possible
@item Cons:
not network-aware
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

  JACK is a low-latency audio server, written for POSIX conformant
operating systems such as GNU/Linux and Apple's OS X. It can connect a
number of different applications to an audio device, as well as allowing
them to share audio between themselves. Its clients can run in their own
processes (ie. as normal applications), or can they can run within the
JACK server (ie. as a "plugin").

  JACK was designed from the ground up for professional audio work, and
its design focuses on two key areas: synchronous execution of all
clients, and low latency operation.


@subsection Audio Library: ao (generic and portable audio output)

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Optional Dependencies: OSS, ALSA, polyp, esd, sunaudio, NAS
@item Webpage: @url{http://www.xiph.org/ao/}
@item Download:

@url{http://downloads.xiph.org/releases/ao/libao-0.8.6.tar.gz},

@url{svn co http://svn.xiph.org/trunk/ao ao}

@item Pros:
portable, wrapper library around system libraries
@item Cons:
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

  Libao is a cross-platform audio library that allows programs to output
audio using a simple API on a wide variety of platforms. It currently
supports Null output (handy for testing without a sound device), OSS,
ALSA, polypaudio (next generation GNOME sound server), esd (EsounD or
Enlightened Sound Daemon), AIX, Sun/NetBSD/OpenBSD, IRIX, NAS


@subsection Audio Library: alsa (Advanced Linux Sound Architecture)

@itemize
@item Availability: Linux
@item Dependencies: ALSA kernel modules
@item Webpage: @url{http://www.alsa-project.org/}
@item Download:

@url{ftp://ftp.alsa-project.org/pub/lib/}

@url{hg clone http://hg-mirror.alsa-project.org/alsa-lib alsa-lib}

@item Pros:
mature, SMP and thread-safe design
@item Cons:
only available under linux, needs kernel support
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize



@subsection Media Library: sndfile

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: none
@item Webpage: @url{http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndfile/}
@item Download:

@url{http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndfile/libsndfile-1.0.15.tar.gz}

@item Maximally provided formats:
@item Notes:
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize


@subsection Media Library: ffmpeg

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Optional Dependencies: mp3lame, libogg, libvorbis, theora, faad,
faac, xvid, x264, a52dec, libdts, amr_nb, amr_wb, amr_if2, Flac,
libmatroska
@item Webpage: @url{http://ffmpeg.sourceforge.net/}
@item Download:

@url{cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anonymous@@mplayerhq.hu:/cvsroot/ffmpeg co ffmpeg}

@item Maximally provided formats: a52, ac3, adpcm, adx, .mp2, .mp3,
Ogg/Vorbis, theora, AAC, xvid, mpeg1-video, mpeg-audio, h.264, h.263,
h.263p, FLV, RealVideo 1.0, RealVideo 2.0, MPEG-4, WMV1, WMV2, SVQ,
MJPEG, LJPEG, JPEGls, .jpeg, .png, .ppm, .pgm, YUV, .pbm, .pam, .bmp,
Huffman-YUV, ASV, Snow, Sonic, DV captures, x264, GSM, Indeo2/3, TSCC,
CSCD, nuppel-video, Qdraw, Qpeg, Loco, Fraps, Xvmc, MACE3/6, CLJR, ROQ,
ROQ Dpcm, interplay video, interplay Dpcm, Xan-WC3, RPZA, Cinepak,
MS-RLE, VQA, 8bps, SMC, flac, truemotion1/2, VMD-Video, VMD-Audio, ZMBV,
Smacker, .dts, RealAudio-144, RealAudio-288, Qt-RLE, Cook, Truespeech,
TTA, AVS, AMR Narrowband, AMR Wideband, ADPCM WAV, PCM/WAV,
DVD-Subtitles, h.261, ASF, matroska, ShockWave Flash, Apple .mov, MP4,
Westwood, V4L, V4L2, MPEG-PS, DV1394, RealMedia, RTP/RTSP, SGI .aiff,
Flic, TTA
@item Notes: Only recent CVS versions are fully supported
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

  FFmpeg has always been a very experimental and developer-driven
project. It is a key component in many multimedia projects and has new
features added constantly. New, official "releases" are few and far
between. In short, if you want to work with FFmpeg, you are advised to
go along with CVS development rather than relying on formal
releases. CVS snapshots work really well 99% of the time so people are
not afraid to use them.

@noindent
Sample @samp{./configure}-line:
@smallexample
./configure --enable-shared --enable-static --enable-mp3lame \
--enable-libogg --enable-vorbis --enable-theora --enable-faad \
--enable-faadbin --enable-faac --enable-xvid --enable-x264 \
--enable-a52 --enable-a52bin --enable-dts --enable-pp \
--enable-amr_nb --enable-amr_wb --enable-amr_if2 \
--enable-pthreads --enable-gpl
@end smallexample


@subsection Media Library: mad

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: none
@item Webpage: @url{http://www.underbit.com/products/mad/}
@item Download:

@url{ftp://ftp.mars.org/pub/mpeg/libmad-0.15.1b.tar.gz}

@item Maximally provided formats: mpeg-audio .mpa, .mp2, .mp3
@item Notes: seems discontinued, not recent
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize

  MAD is a high-quality MPEG audio decoder. It currently supports MPEG-1
and the MPEG-2 extension to lower sampling frequencies, as well as the
de facto MPEG 2.5 format. All three audio layers -- Layer I, Layer
II, and Layer III (i.e. MP3) -- are fully implemented.

  MAD does not yet support MPEG-2 multichannel audio (although it should
be backward compatible with such streams) nor does it currently support
AAC.



@subsection Media Library: SoX

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: none
@item Webpage: @url{http://sox.sourceforge.net/}
@item Download:

@url{http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/sox/sox-12.17.9.tar.gz}

@item Maximally provided formats: raw, 8svx, SGI .aiff, Sun .au, .snd, AVR,
GSM raw, HCOM, MAUD, mp3, TX-16w, .voc, ADPCM .vox, .wav, RIFX, ADPCM
WAV, Ogg/Vorbis, A-law, .wve
@item Notes: must do @samp{make install-lib}
@item Known caveats with SXE: none
@end itemize


@subsection Media Library: xine

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: none
@item Webpage: @url{http://xinehq.de/}
@item Download:

@url{http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/xine/xine-lib-1.1.1.tar.gz}

@url{cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anonymous@@cvs.sf.net:/cvsroot/xine co xine-lib}

@item Maximally provided formats:
@item Notes:
@item Known caveats with SXE: not working
@end itemize


@subsection Media Library: gstreamer

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: none
@item Webpage: @url{http://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/}
@item Download:

@url{http://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/src/gstreamer/gstreamer-0.10.4.tar.bz2}

@url{cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anoncvs@@anoncvs.freedesktop.org:/cvs/gstreamer co gstreamer}

@item Maximally provided formats:
@item Notes:
@item Known caveats with SXE: not working
@end itemize


@subsection Built-in media file handling

@itemize
@item Availability: Unix-wide
@item Dependencies: none
@item Webpage: n/a
@item Download: n/a
@item Maximally provided formats: .wav, RIFX, Sun .au
@item Notes: ugly and old
@item Known caveats with SXE: very limited, very slow
@end itemize



@node Media Streams
@section Media Streams

  SXEmacs provides a common and opaque API to all of the above
libraries.  Media files or streams are encapsulated into media stream
objects, which behave equally whatever library is used to parse them.

@noindent
The fundamental function to create such media streams is
@code{make-media-stream}.

@defun make-media-stream from data &optional driver
Create a new media stream from @var{data}.
@var{from} is a keyword and defines how @var{data} is
interpreted:
@code{:file} - @var{data} is the name of a file
@code{:data} - @var{data} is a string with the stream data
@code{:url}  - @var{data} is a url (string) for streamed media contents

Optional argument @var{driver} (a symbol) may be used to force
the use of a certain driver instead of automatically
detecting a suitable one.  It is one of @samp{ffmpeg}, @samp{sndfile},
@samp{sox}, @samp{mad}, @samp{xine}, @samp{gstreamer}, or @samp{internal}.
@end defun

  Hereby, the media driver which is used in order to handle the
resulting media stream is chosen automatically.  Portions of the data
are passed to all available media APIs, that is all APIs which have been
configured at compile time.  The first such API which parses the portion
successfully is chosen as driver.

@example
(make-media-stream :file "/home/media/audio/Bloke.mp3")
  @result{} #<media-stream :kind #<file "/home/media/audio/Bloke.mp3">
#<media-substream :type #<audio mp3 (mp3), stereo, 44100 Hz, 16 Bit, 128
kb/s>> driven by ffmpeg :author "Chris Franklin " :title: "Bloke " :year
2000>
@end example

  Media stream objects contain information about where to find a medium,
the characteristics (like number of channels, sample rate, resolution),
which demuxer and which decoder to use, and some informational extras.
They do not contain the medium itself nor a raw (i.e. undecoded) form
nor portions of these.  Hence, if you want to use a media stream object
after its creation you should make sure that it still exists.

  Media streams usually consist of several substreams internally.  These
substreams each represent a certain partition of the whole stream.  If
you regard an ordinary movie DVD, the media stream with location
@samp{/path/dvd-drive} would be made up of a substream which contains
the motion picture, a substream which contains a language track, other
audio track substreams which contain the further languages, possibly a
substream for subtitles and so forth.

@noindent
Substreams cannot be accessed individually nor extracted.  This may
change in the future.



@node Audio Devices
@section Audio Devices

  Considering media stream objects as sources for multimedia playback,
the targets are obviously X displays, buffers and/or sound cards or
sound servers.

Like media stream objects, audio device objects are containers for the
underlying driver libraries.

@defun make-audio-device driver &rest device-options
Create a new device to output audio via @var{driver}.
@var{driver} should be a symbol out of 'oss, 'nas, 'esd, 'pulse,
'jack, 'alsa, or 'ao.

The rest arguments may be used to pass options to the selected
output driver. These should be `:keyword value' pairs.

Valid keywords for ALSA are:
:device - the name of the hardware interface (default: "default"),
  you may want to try "plughw:0,0" first
:keep-open - whether to exclusively reserve the device.
  Note this may prevent other applications from using the device.

Valid keywords for (deprecated) OSS are:
:device - the name of the hardware interface (default: "/dev/dsp")
:keep-open - whether to exclusively reserve the device.
  Note this may prevent other applications from using the device.

Valid keywords for ESD are:
:server - to use a distant ESD daemon (e.g. "my.machine.box:16001")
The default for ESD output is to use a locally running daemon and
to connect to it via unix domain sockets.

Valid keywords for Pulse are:
:server - the host name to connect to (default: "localhost")
:sink - the name of the sink to connect to (e.g. "output")
:source - the name of the source to record from (e.g. "mic_in")
:client - how to call the client on the server (default "SXEmacs")
:stream - how to call the stream on the server (e.g. "fancy-sound")
:immediate - connect to sink immediately and keep the connection
  alive as long as the audio device exists (default `t')
:threaded - initiate a threaded mainloop (default `t')
:force - if non-`nil' the device object is created even though the
  pulse mainloop could not be started; if `nil' any mainloop failure
  results in an error.  This can be useful if you want to have an
  audio device object although the server is not (yet) up or not
  (yet) accepting connections from you. (default `nil')

Valid keywords for Jack are:
:server - the jack server to connect to (default "default")
:client - how to call the client on the server (default "SXEmacs")

Valid keywords for AO are:
:driver - the name of the output driver (e.g. "alsa", "esd", etc.)
:options - a list of AO suboptions (see AO documentation)
The default for AO output is to pass nothing and entirely use the
system and user configuration files.

Valid keywords for NAS are:
:server - the NAS server to connect to.  This can be either:
  - an X display string like "localhost:0.0", the X display string
    the current frame is on can be obtained by the function
    `device-connection'
  - or a SXEmacs device name like "localhost-11-0" which can be
    obtained by `device-name'
  - or a SXEmacs device object, obtainable by `frame-device', like
    #<x-device on "localhost:11.0" 0xee4>
If the :server keyword is omitted SXEmacs tries to determine a
sensible default in this order:
  - use the frame device of the current frame
  - use the frame device of the initial frame
  - use the display specified in $AUDIOSERVER
  - use the display specified in $DISPLAY
  - try "localhost:0.0"

@end defun

@example
@group
(make-audio-device 'pulse)
  @result{} #<audio-device :type pulse :server #default :sink #default
       :source #default :server-state #connected :api #threaded
       :mainloop 0x973f8c0 :device-state #unknown>
@end group

@group
(make-audio-device 'jack)
  @result{} #<audio-device :type jack :server #default :client SXEmacs
       :device-state #unknown>
@end group
@end example

@defun audio-device-p object
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{object} is an audio-device, @code{nil}
otherwise.
@end defun

@defvar default-audio-device nil
Default audio device to use.
@end defvar


@node Media Threads
@section Media Threads

  Media threads can be thought of a way to plug a certain media stream
into a certain output device.  Since SXEmacs merely supports audio
output devices the only partition which is finally ``played'' is an
audio substream.

@c This changeset completely splits up the Thread and Stream types into trees. This
@c allows to have several substreams embedded into a stream, respectively several
@c subthreads can be started from a thread.

The current structure looks like:

@example
                     up          up
          +------------> Stream <------------+
          |                 ^                |
    first |                 | up             | last
          v       next      |        next    v
    substream1 <-----> substream2 <-----> substream3
               prev               prev
@end example

Similarly for Threads:

@example
                     up          up
          +------------> Thread <------------+
          |                 ^                |
    first |                 | up             | last
          v       next      |        next    v
    subthread1 <-----> subthread2 <-----> subthread3
               prev               prev
@end example


To be precise, threads are the containers for the streams. Streams are stored
(along with devices) inside threads, while substreams are stored inside
subthreads. In source/sink language, a thread is the cable to plug a source
(stream) to a sink (device).

This brings us to:

@example
                     up  +========+  up
                 ,-----> | Thread | <-----,
                /        +--------+        \
               /         | Stream |         \
              /          | Device |          \
             /           | State  |           \
            /            | PState |            \
           /             | Result |             \
          /              +========+              \
          |                   ^                  |
    first |                   | up               | last
          v                   |                  v
   +==========+    next +==========+    next +==========+
   |subthread1| <-----> |subthread2| <-----> |subthread3|
   +----------+ prev    +----------+ prev    +----------+
   |substream1|         |substream2|         |substream3|
   |pthread_t1|         |pthread_t2|         |pthread_t3|
   |privdata1 |         |privdata2 |         |privdata3 |
   +==========+         +==========+         +==========+
@end example

Note: It is yet @emph{not} possible to specify different devices for
each subthread. This will require another split of the device
structure into a device+subdevice tree.

In order to actually plug a media stream to an audio device you first
have to decide whether you want the safe synchronous, or the
experimental asynchronous way.

Due to the experimental status of asynchronous playback it has to be
turned on explicitly.

@defvar number-of-media-workers 4
Number of worker threads spawned as queue listeners.
@end defvar

@defun init-asynchronousity
Initialise queue listener threads.
The number of spawned worker threads can be controlled by
@code{number-of-media-workers}.
When called the complementary variable @code{synchronous-sounds} is
set to @code{nil}.
@end defun

@defun uninit-asynchronousity
Stop all queue listener threads.
Depending on whether there are busy threads this may block the
main execution loop until all worker threads are non-busy.
When called the complementary variable @code{synchronous-sounds} is
set to @code{t}.
@end defun

@defun play-media-stream-synchronously stream &optional device sentinel volume
Play the media stream @var{stream} on an audio device synchronously.
This function disregards the value of @code{synchronous-sounds},
instead streams will always be played in synchronous mode.

Optional second argument @var{device} must be an audio device created
by @code{make-audio-device}.
If omitted @var{device} defaults to the value of
@code{default-audio-device}.

Optional third argument @var{sentinel} specifies a lisp function to be
called after the stream playback finishes.  The function should
take one argument (@var{stream}) where @var{stream} is bound to the
media stream which finished.  See @code{set-media-thread-sentinel}.

Optional fourth argument @code{volume} specifies an initial value for
the playback volume.
@end defun

@defun play-media-stream-asynchronously stream &optional device sentinel volume
Play the media stream @var{stream} on an audio device asynchronously.
Return a media-thread object which can be used to interact with
the worker thread which handles @var{stream}.
This function disregards the value of @code{synchronous-sounds},
instead streams will always be played in asynchronous mode,
provided the worker threads have been initialised.
See @code{init-asynchronousity}.

Optional second argument @var{device} must be an audio device created
by @code{make-audio-device}.
If omitted @code{device} defaults to the value of
@code{default-audio-device}.

Optional third argument @var{sentinel} specifies a lisp function to be
called after the stream playback finishes.  The function should
take one argument (@var{stream}) where @var{stream} is bound to the
media stream which finished.  See @code{set-media-thread-sentinel}.

Optional fourth argument @code{volume} specifies an initial value for
the playback volume.
@end defun

To overcome the problem of deciding which of the playback functions to
use, there is a wrapper function which does The Right Thing@sc{[tm]}.

@defvar synchronous-sounds t
Play sounds synchronously, if non-@code{nil}.
Only applies if SXEmacs has been compiled with a threading library.
Otherwise, sounds are always played synchronously.
@end defvar

@defun play-media-stream stream &optional device sentinel volume
Play the media stream @var{stream} on an audio device.
@var{stream} must be a valid media-stream object as created by
@code{make-media-stream}.

Optional second argument @var{device} must be an audio device created
by @code{make-audio-device}.
If omitted @var{device} defaults to the value of
@code{default-audio-device}.

Optional third argument @var{sentinel} specifies a lisp function to be
called after the stream playback finishes.  The function should
take one argument (@var{stream}) where @var{stream} is bound to the
media stream which finished.  See @code{set-media-thread-sentinel}.

Optional fourth argument @var{volume} specifies an initial value for
the playback volume.


Depending on the value of @code{synchronous-sounds} this function will
decide whether to play either asynchronously or synchronously.

If @code{synchronous-sounds} is @code{nil} @emph{and} threads are
supported, streams will be passed to the
@code{play-media-stream-asynchronously} function.
In that case return a media-thread object which can be used to
interact with the worker thread which handles @var{stream}.

If @code{synchronous-sounds} is non-@code{nil} @emph{or} threads are
not supported, streams will be passed to the
@code{play-media-stream-synchronously} function.
In that case return non-@code{nil} if @var{stream} was played
successfully, and @code{nil} otherwise.

See @code{play-media-stream-synchronously} and
@code{play-media-stream-asynchronously}."
@end defun


@defun pause-media-thread thread
Pause the media thread @var{thread}.
Optionally @var{thread} can be @code{'all} in which case all running
media threads are paused.
@end defun

@defun resume-media-thread thread
Resume a paused media thread @var{thread}.
Optionally @var{thread} can be @code{'all} in which case all paused
media threads are resumed.
@end defun

@defun stop-media-thread thread
Stop a media thread @var{thread}.
Optionally @var{thread} can be @code{'all} in which case all media
threads are stopped.

Stopping @var{thread} will unleash the respective worker threads.
This is an irreversible action.
@end defun

@defun media-thread-set-volume thread volume
Set the volume of the media thread @var{thread} to @var{volume}.

@var{thread} is a media thread object with an audio substream.
Optionally @var{thread} can be @code{'all} in which case the volume
change applies to all media threads.

@var{volume} is either a comparable number (see @code{comparablep}) or
a vector of comparable numbers.
In the former case @var{volume} sets the master volume of all channels.
In the latter case @var{volume} sets the volumes channelwise.

Any volume value is coerced to an integer.
A volume of 128 is the norm.
A volume of 0 is muting the respective channels.
A volume of 255 is the maximal volume, though clipping may occur.
Volumes greater than 128 cause an amplification of the stream,
255 is the maximal value.  Note that clipping may occur.
@end defun

@defun media-thread-volume thread
Return the current volume of media thread @var{thread}.
@end defun

@defun media-thread-set-rate thread rate
Set the rate of media thread @var{thread} to @var{rate}.

@var{thread} is a media thread object with an audio or video
substream.  Optionally @var{thread} can be @code{'all} in which case
the rate change applies to all media threads.
@end defun

@defun media-thread-rate thread
Return the current rate of media thread @var{thread}.
@end defun


@defun ding &optional arg sound device
Beep, or flash the frame.
Also, unless an argument is given,
terminate any keyboard macro currently executing.
When called from lisp, the second argument is what sound to make, and
the third argument is the device to make it in (defaults to the selected
device), but may also be an audio device created by
@code{make-audio-device}.
@end defun


@c sounds by symbol voodoo

@defvar sound-alist nil
An alist associating names with sounds.
When @code{beep} or @code{ding} is called with one of the name
symbols, the associated sound will be generated instead of the
standard beep.

Each element of @code{sound-alist} is a list describing a sound.
The first element of the list is the name of the sound being defined.
Subsequent elements of the list are alternating keyword/value pairs:

Keyword: Value:
-------  -----
sound    A string of raw sound data (deprecated), or the name of another
         sound to play.   The symbol @code{t} here means use the
         default X beep.
stream   A media stream object containing the sound.
volume   An integer from 0-255, defaulting to @code{bell-volume}
pitch    If using the default X beep, the pitch (Hz) to generate.
duration If using the default X beep, the duration (milliseconds).

You should probably add things to this list by calling the function
@code{load-sound-file}.

Note: SXEmacs must be built with sound support for your system.  Not all
systems support sound.
Note: The pitch, duration, and volume options are available everywhere,
but many X servers ignore the @code{pitch} option.

The following beep-types are used by SXEmacs itself:

auto-save-error  when an auto-save does not succeed
command-error    when the emacs command loop catches an error
undefined-key    when you type a key that is undefined
undefined-click  when you use an undefined mouse-click combination
no-completion    during completing-read
y-or-n-p         when you type something other than `y' or `n'
yes-or-no-p      when you type something other than `yes' or `no'
default          used when nothing else is appropriate.

Other lisp packages may use other beep types, but these are the ones that
the C kernel of Emacs uses.
@end defvar

@c moved from display.texi
@defun play-sound sound &optional volume device sentinel
Play the sound @var{sound} (a symbol) from @var{sound-alist}.

The sound is played at the specified @var{volume} (0-100, default
specified by the @var{bell-volume} variable).

With no further media drivers, the sound file must be in the
Sun/NeXT U-LAW format. Under Linux WAV files are also supported.

@var{device} can be any device created by @code{make-audio-device}
and defaults to @var{default-audio-device}, or, if that is @code{nil},
to the selected device.

Optional argument @var{sentinel} specifies a lisp function to be
called after the stream playback finishes.  The function should
take two arguments (@var{stream} @var{state}) where @var{stream}
is bound to the media stream which finished and @var{state} is a
symbol (currently the only valid symbol is @code{'finished}).
See @code{set-media-thread-sentinel}.
@end defun

@defun load-sound-file filename sound-name &optional volume
Read in an audio-file and add it to the sound-alist.
The cached sound can be referenced later by @var{sound-name}.

@var{filename} can either be absolute or relative, in which case the
file will be searched in the directories given by
@code{default-sound-directory-list}.
When looking for the file, the extensions given by
@code{sound-extension-list} are also tried in the given order.
@end defun


@c @c @c media.texi ends here
