@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the SXEmacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Copyright (C) 2005 Sebastian Freundt <hroptatyr@sxemacs.org>
@c See the file lispref.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../../info/mouse.info

@node Mouse
@chapter The Mouse
@cindex mouse

* Mouse Position::		Asking where the mouse is, or moving it.

@ignore  @c Not in SXEmacs.
@node Mouse Tracking
@section Mouse Tracking
@cindex mouse tracking
@cindex tracking the mouse

(deleted)
@end ignore

@ignore
@c These are not implemented yet.

These functions change the screen appearance instantaneously.  The
effect is transient, only until the next ordinary SXEmacs redisplay.  That
is ok for mouse tracking, since it doesn't make sense for mouse tracking
to change the text, and the body of @code{track-mouse} normally reads
the events itself and does not do redisplay.

@defun x-contour-region window start end
This function draws lines to make a box around the text from @var{start}
to @var{end}, in window @var{window}.
@end defun

@defun x-uncontour-region window start end
This function erases the lines that would make a box around the text
from @var{start} to @var{end}, in window @var{window}.  Use it to remove
a contour that you previously made by calling @code{x-contour-region}.
@end defun

@defun x-draw-rectangle frame left top right bottom
This function draws a hollow rectangle on frame @var{frame} with the
specified edge coordinates, all measured in pixels from the inside top
left corner.  It uses the cursor color, the one used for indicating the
location of point.
@end defun

@defun x-erase-rectangle frame left top right bottom
This function erases a hollow rectangle on frame @var{frame} with the
specified edge coordinates, all measured in pixels from the inside top
left corner.  Erasure means redrawing the text and background that
normally belong in the specified rectangle.
@end defun
@end ignore


@node Mouse Position
@section Mouse Position
@cindex mouse position
@cindex position of mouse

The functions @code{mouse-position}, @code{mouse-pixel-position},
@code{set-mouse-position} and @code{set-mouse-pixel-position} give
access to the current position of the mouse.

@defun mouse-position &optional device
This function returns a list (@var{window} @var{x} . @var{y}) giving the
current mouse window and position.  The position is given in character
cells, where @samp{(0, 0)} is the upper-left corner.

@var{device} specifies the device on which to read the mouse position,
and defaults to the selected device.  If the device is a mouseless
terminal or SXEmacs hasn't been programmed to read its mouse position, it
returns the device's selected window for @var{window} and @code{nil} for
@var{x} and @var{y}.
@end defun

@defun mouse-pixel-position &optional device
This function returns a list (@var{window} @var{x} . @var{y}) giving the
current mouse window and position.  The position is given in pixel
units, where @samp{(0, 0)} is the upper-left corner.

@var{device} specifies the device on which to read the mouse position,
and defaults to the selected device.  If the device is a mouseless
terminal or SXEmacs hasn't been programmed to read its mouse position, it
returns the device's selected window for @var{window} and @code{nil} for
@var{x} and @var{y}.
@end defun

@defun set-mouse-position window x y
This function @dfn{warps the mouse} to the center of character position
@var{x}, @var{y} in frame @var{window}.  The arguments @var{x} and
@var{y} are integers, giving the position in characters relative to
the top left corner of @var{window}.

@cindex warping the mouse
@cindex mouse warping
Warping the mouse means changing the screen position of the mouse as if
the user had moved the physical mouse---thus simulating the effect of
actual mouse motion.
@end defun

@defun set-mouse-pixel-position window x y
This function @dfn{warps the mouse} to pixel position @var{x}, @var{y}
in frame @var{window}.  The arguments @var{x} and @var{y} are integers,
giving the position in pixels relative to the top left corner of
@var{window}.
@end defun
