@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the SXEmacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2005 Sebastian Freundt
@c See the file lispref.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../../info/openssl.info

@node OpenSSL Support, Enhanced Number Types, PostgreSQL Support, top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter OpenSSL Support
@cindex OpenSSL

SXEmacs can be linked with OpenSSL libcrypto and libssl to provide
a comprehensive gateway to cryptographic and related functions.

@comment HINT FOR EXPERIMENTAL STATUS
Note: Currently the API provided for SXEmacs is experimental.
Conceptional changes, renaming, and changes in the behaviour of
functions are highly likely.
@comment REMOVE ME WHEN I AM STABLE


@menu
* Building SXEmacs with OpenSSL support::
* SXEmacs OpenSSL API::
@end menu


@node Building SXEmacs with OpenSSL support
@section Building SXEmacs with OpenSSL support

SXEmacs OpenSSL support requires linking to the OpenSSL libcrypto and libssl
libraries.  We recommend the most recent stable version, which is
0.9.8b as of writing this documentation.  Nonetheless, we have
successfully tested each version since 0.9.6d (May 2002).  OpenSSL can
be obtained at
@example
@url{http://www.openssl.org}
@end example

For most systems the following snippet can be used to build a
reasonably feature-rich and yet fast library:

@example
./config --prefix=/usr/local/ threads enable-mdc2 enable-gmp \
enable-rc5 enable-shared enable-zlib enable-zlib-dynamic enable-dso \
enable-krb5 enable-asm
@end example

Some of the above options depend in turn on external resources, like
GMP and zlib.  However, describing in detail how to build and install
OpenSSL is beyond the scope of this document.  See the OpenSSL manual
for details.

If you plan to build SXEmacs with OpenSSL support you need to install
OpenSSL first.  On some systems, OpenSSL will come pre-installed in
/usr.  In this case, all you need to do is passing
@samp{--with-openssl} to configure.

If the configure script fails to detect your installation of OpenSSL,
make sure you supplied header files, or try to explicitly name the
location of your OpenSSL installation via the @samp{--site-prefixes}
flag when you run the SXEmacs configure script.


@node SXEmacs OpenSSL API
@section SXEmacs OpenSSL API

@c Explaining cryptographical details behind OpenSSL API functions is
@c beyond the scope of this document.  Ask Professor Google.
@c @comment erm, again: Why? maybe some alice-bob examples?

The SXEmacs OpenSSL API is intended to be an exact copy of the OpenSSL
API functions in libcrypto and libssl.  The intent is to provide elisp
for everything you have told your OpenSSL library to contain.  Then,
at stage 2, let higher level Lisp code come up with policies and
remove the guts of libcrypto and libssl.

Despite this rather noble intention of giving access to anything in
OpenSSL there are conceptional limits.  Auxiliary stuff from OpenSSL
such as BIO or BN will not be accessible to elisp, though the C
implementation might use them directly or indirectly as well.

On the one hand this is due to their very special purpose (like finding
prime numbers), on the other hand due to their obsoleteness (like
BIO_gets, BIO_do_connect, etc.) when SXEmacs already provides a similar
or more powerful implementation.

For convenience, we denote the elisp implementation of OpenSSL with openssl
whereas the distributed library package from @url{http://www.openssl.org}
is denoted OpenSSL.


@menu
* openssl General::		General Information
* openssl RAND::		(Pseudo) Random Numbers
* openssl MD::			Message Digests (aka hashes)
* openssl HMAC::		Message Authentication Codes (aka keyed hashes)
* openssl CIPHER::		Symmetric Cryptography
* openssl PKEY::		Public Key Crypto Systems (aka asymmetric ciphers)
* openssl SSL/TLS::		Secure Network Layers
@end menu


@node openssl General
@subsection General information

In this section we deal with informative functions which kind of
reflect the underlying library capabilities.  It is very hard to say
which of the capabilities are guaranteed to exist since it is possible
to strip certain cryptographic stuff from the OpenSSL installation,
for instance due to license, patent, or legal issues.

@defun ossl-version
Return a descriptive version number of the OpenSSL in use.

The version string should be identical to the output of @code{openssl
version} in a shell.

@example
@group
(ossl-version)
  @result{} "OpenSSL 0.9.9-dev XX xxx XXXX"
@end group
@end example
@end defun

@defun ossl-available-digests
Return a list of digest algorithms in the underlying crypto library.
This yields a plain list of symbols.
@end defun

@defun ossl-available-ciphers
Return a list of cipher algorithms in the underlying crypto library.
This yields a list of symbols.
@end defun

@example
@group
(ossl-available-digests)
  @result{} '(UNDEF MD2 MD5 RSA-MD2 RSA-MD5 SHA RSA-SHA SHA1 RSA-SHA1 DSA-SHA
       DSA-SHA1-old MDC2 RSA-MDC2 DSA-SHA1 RSA-SHA1-2 DSA RIPEMD160
       RSA-RIPEMD160 MD4 RSA-MD4 ecdsa-with-SHA1 RSA-SHA256 RSA-SHA384
       RSA-SHA512 RSA-SHA224 SHA256 SHA384 SHA512 SHA224 whirlpool)
@end group

@group
(ossl-available-ciphers)
  @result{} '(RC4 DES-ECB DES-CFB DES-CBC DES-EDE DES-EDE3 IDEA-CBC IDEA-CFB
       IDEA-ECB RC2-CBC RC2-ECB RC2-CFB RC2-OFB DES-EDE-CBC
       DES-EDE3-CBC DES-OFB IDEA-OFB DES-EDE-CFB DES-EDE3-CFB
       DES-EDE-OFB DES-EDE3-OFB DESX-CBC BF-CBC BF-ECB BF-CFB BF-OFB
       RC4-40 RC2-40-CBC CAST5-CBC CAST5-ECB CAST5-CFB CAST5-OFB
       RC5-CBC RC5-ECB RC5-CFB RC5-OFB RC2-64-CBC AES-128-ECB
       AES-128-CBC AES-128-OFB AES-128-CFB AES-192-ECB AES-192-CBC
       AES-192-OFB AES-192-CFB AES-256-ECB AES-256-CBC AES-256-OFB
       AES-256-CFB AES-128-CFB1 AES-192-CFB1 AES-256-CFB1 AES-128-CFB8
       AES-192-CFB8 AES-256-CFB8 DES-CFB1 DES-CFB8 CAMELLIA-128-CBC
       CAMELLIA-192-CBC CAMELLIA-256-CBC CAMELLIA-128-ECB
       CAMELLIA-192-ECB CAMELLIA-256-ECB CAMELLIA-128-CFB
       CAMELLIA-192-CFB CAMELLIA-256-CFB CAMELLIA-128-CFB1
       CAMELLIA-192-CFB1 CAMELLIA-256-CFB1 CAMELLIA-128-CFB8
       CAMELLIA-192-CFB8 CAMELLIA-256-CFB8 CAMELLIA-128-OFB
       CAMELLIA-192-OFB CAMELLIA-256-OFB)
@end group
@end example

@noindent
These two functions are most useful to conditionalise like
@example
(when (member 'MD4 (ossl-available-digests))
  @dots{})
@end example

The aforementioned functions work at run-time (not compile time) so it
is possible when building a dynamically linked SXEmacs to update
OpenSSL on the fly.  A very rough estimate is to assume to have
support for the MD5 and SHA1 message digests, and the BF-* symmetric
cipher systems, any installation of OpenSSL without those is purely
ridiculous although not impossible.


Furthermore we provide convenience functions which, given a digest or
cipher algorithm symbol, allow to obtain information about the hash
result size of a digest, and the key size of a cipher, respectively.

@defun ossl-digest-size digest
Return the hash length of @var{digest} in bytes.

@example
(ossl-digest-size 'MD5)
  @result{} 16
(ossl-digest-size 'SHA512)
  @result{} 64
@end example
@end defun

@defun ossl-digest-block-size digest
Return the block size of @var{digest} in bytes.

@example
(ossl-digest-block-size 'MD5)
  @result{} 64
(ossl-digest-block-size 'SHA512)
  @result{} 128
@end example
@end defun

@defun ossl-cipher-key-length cipher
Return the effective key size of @var{cipher} in bytes.

@example
(ossl-cipher-key-length 'RC4)
  @result{} 16
(ossl-cipher-key-length 'CAMELLIA-256-CBC)
  @result{} 32
@end example
@end defun

@defun ossl-cipher-iv-length cipher
Return the initialisation vector length of @var{cipher} in bytes.

@example
(ossl-cipher-iv-length 'idea-cbc)
  @result{} 8
(ossl-cipher-iv-length 'aes-256-cbc)
  @result{} 16
@end example
@end defun

@defun ossl-cipher-block-size cipher
Return the block size of @var{cipher} in bytes.

@example
(ossl-cipher-block-size 'aes-256-cbc)
  @result{} 16
(ossl-cipher-block-size 'rc4)
  @result{} 1
@end example
@end defun

@defun ossl-cipher-mode cipher
Return the operation mode of @var{cipher}.

@example
(ossl-cipher-mode 'rc4)
  @result{} stream
(ossl-cipher-mode 'aes-192-ofb)
  @result{} ofb
@end example
@end defun


The openssl API provides following features:
@itemize
@item
@code{'openssl} when fundamental functions are available
@item
@code{'openssl-rsa} when RSA keys are available
@item
@code{'openssl-dsa} when DSA keys are available
@item
@code{'openssl-ec} when elliptic curves are available
@item
@code{'openssl-dh} when DH keys are available
@item
@code{'openssl-ssl} when the TLS/SSL and X509 capabilities are
available
@end itemize


@node openssl RAND
@subsection (Pseudo) Random Numbers

Random numbers are necessary for cryptographically secure
implementations.  The term number here indeed means a string.  OpenSSL
itself provides random number generators which fulfill the the demands
of cryptography.

@defun ossl-rand-bytes count
Return @var{count} bytes of randomness.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun

@example
@group
(base16-encode-string (ossl-rand-bytes 8))
  @result{} "5a78acd572984bdf"
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Modern systems supply more sophisticated sources for random data, so
called entropy gathering daemons.

@defun ossl-rand-bytes-egd count egd
Return @var{count} bytes of randomness from an EGD socket.
By default use the socket @file{/var/run/egd-pool}.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun

@example
@group
(base16-encode-string (ossl-rand-bytes-egd 8 "/var/run/egd-pool"))
  @result{} "59342a240b356a04"
@end group
@end example

Please note that the system's random sources are used only for seeding
OpenSSL's pseudo-random number generator.  So even large amounts of
random data should be feasible.  In contrast querying for large
amounts of random data directly most likely freezes your process since
the size of random devices or pools, and hence the size of cached
random data, is quite limited.

Random numbers generated this way, can be used as ``passwords'' or
salt values in various encryption and decryption functions.  As stated
above, whenever security is concerned one of the above functions,
@code{ossl-rand-bytes} or @code{ossl-rand-bytes-egd} should be used to
obtain random numbers.  The built-in @code{random} function of SXEmacs
is @emph{not} cryptographically secure.


@node openssl MD
@subsection Message Digests (aka hashes)

  Message digests are widely used in modern information
infrastructure.  They are derived from (collision free) one-way hash
functions.

  A hash function (such as @samp{md5} or @samp{sha1}) is a function
with following properties:

@enumerate
@item reduction: data of arbitrary length is mapped onto data
  of fixed length
@item dispersion: a change of one bit in input data changes
  (ideally) half the bits of the hash value.
@item well definedness: computing a hash value from the same
  source data twice yields the same result
@item efficiency: computing hash values is efficient (ideally
  with complexity O(n)) on the input, but it is hard to
  compute a preimage for a given hash value.
@end enumerate

Often, the last property is too weak in practice, therefore
most hash functions comply with the even stronger:

@itemize
@item collision-freeness: it is hard to compute two different
  source data which result in the same hash value.
@end itemize

  Message digests fulfill several tasks in daily use.  Most commonly
used are so called checksums.  In modern days hash functions are used
almost exclusively for their error detecting facilities in contrast to
other checksum algorithms like CRC32.

  Beyond that, message digests play an important role in digital
signatures.  Since public key crypto systems map long plaintexts on
long ciphertexts, message digests are used to obscure the length of a
plaintext.

  Therefore in digital signatures not the message itself is signed but
the hash value of that message.  That also assures a certain upper
bound of the length of a digital signature which is (as in real life)
rather short compared to the message that was signed.

  Okay, after this short introduction to message digests, here are the
functions to access them from elisp.

@defun ossl-digest digest string
Return the message digest of @var{string} computed by @var{digest}.
@var{digest} may be one of the OpenSSL digests you have compiled.
See @code{ossl-available-digests}.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function (like
@code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns binary
string data.
@end defun

  In order to compute digest sums from files without actually looking
at the file contents explicitly, there is the companion function
@code{ossl-digest-file} which works similarly.

@defun ossl-digest digest file
Return the message digest of the contents of @var{file} computed by
@var{digest}.
@var{digest} may be one of the OpenSSL digests you have compiled.
See @code{ossl-available-digests}.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function (like
@code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns binary
string data.
@end defun

  The current implementation of the OpenSSL API in SXEmacs uses the
EVP layer of OpenSSL to access the digests.

@example
@group
(base16-encode-string (ossl-digest 'md5 "hash me"))
  @result{} "17b31dce96b9d6c6d0a6ba95f47796fb"
@end group

@group
(base16-encode-string (ossl-digest 'SHA1 "hash me"))
  @result{} "43f932e4f7c6ecd136a695b7008694bb69d517bd""
@end group
@end example

Let's do some performance tests.

@example
@group
;; @r{this is the SXEmacs built-in implementation of MD5}
(let ((st (current-btime)))
  (dotimes (i 100000)
    (md5 "Some test string to hash"))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 6194289
  ;; @r{time in microseconds, so this is about 6 seconds}
@end group

@group
;; @r{now compare to the OpenSSL implementation}
(let ((st (current-btime)))
  (dotimes (i 100000)
    (ossl-digest 'md5 "Some test string to hash"))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 10589408
  ;; @r{which is about 10 seconds}
@end group
@end example

  As we can see, the built-in implementation has slightly better
performance when hashing short strings.  The following example shows
performance on long strings, like the buffer string here.

@example
@group
(length (buffer-string))
  @result{} 16861
@end group

@group
;; @r{we begin with the built-in implementation}
(let ((st (current-btime))
      (b (buffer-string)))
  (dotimes (i 100000)
    (md5 b))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 74350982
  ;; @r{which is about 74 seconds}
@end group

@group
;; @r{compare to the OpenSSL API}
(let ((st (current-btime))
      (b (buffer-string)))
  (dotimes (i 100000)
    (base16-encode-string
      (ossl-digest 'md5 b)))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 31697926
  ;; @r{which is about 31 seconds}
@end group
@end example

  This latter example shows digest hashing ``under real conditions''
since in practice messages to be hashed are typically in the range of
1000 to 30000 characters.  This range is even vastly exceeded when
dealing with checksums for files.

  Since the built-in md5 implementation cannot handle file streams, we
have to turn them into strings.  A possible way to achieve this has
been suggested by Steve Youngs.  I shall illustrate it with a tarball
file.

@example
@group
freundt@@muck:~> ls -sh ~/temp/pdftex-1.30.3.tar.bz2
3.2M /home/freundt/temp/pdftex-1.30.3.tar.bz2
@end group

@group
(let ((st (current-btime))
      (b (with-temp-buffer
           (insert-file-contents-literally
            "~/temp/pdftex-1.30.3.tar.bz2")
           (buffer-string))))
  (dotimes (i 100)
    (md5 b))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 22729718
  ;; @r{which is about 22 seconds}
@end group
@end example

Compared to the file stream function @code{ossl-digest-file}:

@example
@group
(let ((st (current-btime)))
  (dotimes (i 100)
    (ossl-digest-file 'md5 "~/temp/pdftex-1.30.3.tar.bz2"))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 4189695
  ;; @r{which is about 4 seconds}
@end group
@end example

  Another performance test which compares the elisp implementation of
sha1 (taken from `No Gnus v0.4') to the one from the OpenSSL API

@example
@group
(let ((st (current-btime)))
  (dotimes (i 500)
    (sha1-binary "a short test string"))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 2574326
  ;; @r{which is about 2.5 seconds}
@end group

@group
  ;; @r{the same with the OpenSSL API}
(let ((st (current-btime)))
  (dotimes (i 500)
    (ossl-digest 'sha1 "a short test string"))
  (- (current-btime) st))
  @result{} 31378
  ;; @r{which is about 0.03 seconds}
@end group
@end example

  These results suggest to always use the openssl interface in favour of
other implementations.


@node openssl HMAC
@subsection Message Authentication Codes (aka keyed hashes)

  Ordinary message digests only offer data integrity verification,
while HMACs may be used to simultaneously verify both the data
integrity and the authenticity of a message.  This is accomplished by
using a secret key.  Now whenever two parties have agreed upon a
common secret key, one of them can verify that a message hash was
indeed computed by the other one.

@defun ossl-hmac digest message password
Return the message authentication code of @var{message}
using the hash function @var{digest} and the key @var{password}.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun

  Unlike in public-key cryptography, this technique requires a new
secret key for any two parties which want to communicate.  On the
other hand, this technique works symmetrically, that is the same
function can be used for both generating and verifying a keyed message
digest.

@example
@group
(base16-encode-string
 (ossl-hmac 'SHA512 "string to hash" "secret"))
  @result{} "62351dfae2030fb28058a2aeba6ce3597d803575c120109ed6cfee240d7
      50e71ffff1d8dfc8d52e666549dcb6ba95fb4d550bdc9f31178c19fecb4
      30ddb7b565"
@end group

@group
;; @r{now hashing with a false password}
(base16-encode-string
 (ossl-hmac 'SHA512 "string to hash" "false"))
  @result{} "44afb8f67ea7f66693e891e79b7295569163e3e6faebd47d2a63e564778
      c72221cbb4cdff01ff1052ea98d2058f33c1ecf48f0c45bb64e526a81d8
      f389436ab0"
@end group
@end example


@node openssl CIPHER
@subsection Symmetric Cryptography

  Symmetric-key algorithms can be divided into stream ciphers and
block ciphers.  Stream ciphers encrypt the bits of the message one at
a time, and block ciphers take a number of bits and encrypt them as a
single unit.

  In order to use symmetric-key cryptography some preparations have to
be done, mostly due to the block-oriented operation of the algorithms.
The following function, given a cipher and digest algorithm, computes
a valid key suitable for the given cipher algorithm.

@defun ossl-bytes-to-key cipher digest salt password count
Derive a key and initialisation vector (iv) suitable for a cipher.
Return a string @var{key} being the key. The initialisation vector is
put into @var{key}'s property list as @code{'iv}.

@var{cipher} (a symbol) is the cipher to derive the key and IV for.
Valid ciphers can be obtained by @code{ossl-available-ciphers}.

@var{digest} (a symbol) is the message digest to use.
Valid digests can be obtained by @code{ossl-available-digests}.

@var{salt} (string or @code{nil}) is used as a salt in the derivation.
Use @code{nil} here to indicate that no salt is used.

@var{password} is an arbitrary string which is processed to derive a
unique key and IV.

@var{count} (a positive integer) is the iteration count to use. This
indicates how often the hash algorithm is called recursively.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun

Note: It is disregarded to use the key/iv pair of, say, AES-128 cipher
for e.g. a blowfish (BF) cipher, although it seems possible and is not
explicitly forbidden.  Such malpractices may result in severe
crashes.

@example
@group
(base16-encode-string
 (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "somesalt" "secret" 1))
  @result{} "bd2b1aaf7ef4f09be9f52ce2d8d599674d81aa9d6a4421696dc4d93dd0619d68"
@end group

@group
(base16-encode-string
 (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "diffsalt" "secret" 1))
  @result{} "bd2b1aaf7ef4f09be9f52ce2d8d599674d81aa9d6a4421696dc4d93dd0619d68"
@end group

@group
(base16-encode-string
 (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "diffsalt" "retsec" 1))
  @result{} "38515c1868bcab470075ec32bc79b0ed1aa945de95d2261991ea840921e7747b"
@end group
@end example

These examples show how different passwords yield different keys, and
that different salts do not affect the result.  As mentioned in the
doc string the result carries an object-plist with the initialisation
vector inside:

@example
@group
(object-plist
 (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "somesalt" "secret" 1))
  @result{} (iv "????????????????")
@end group

@group
(base16-encode-string
 (get
  (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "somesalt" "secret" 1)
  'iv))
  @result{} "2ce56b4d64a9ef097761ced99e0f6726"
@end group
@end example


@defun ossl-encrypt cipher string key &optional iv
Return the cipher of @var{string} computed by @var{cipher} under
@var{key}.

@var{cipher} (a symbol) may be one of the OpenSSL cipher algorithms
you have compiled. See @code{ossl-available-ciphers}.

@var{string} is the text to be encrypted.

@var{key} should be a key generated suitably for this cipher, for
example by @code{ossl-bytes-to-key}.

Optional fourth argument @var{iv} should be an initialisation vector
suitable for this cipher. Normally the initialisation vector from
@var{key}'s property list is used. However, if @var{iv} is
non-@code{nil}, use this IV instead.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun

@defun ossl-decrypt cipher string key &optional iv
Return the deciphered version of @var{string} computed by @var{cipher}
under @var{key}.

@var{cipher} (a symbol) may be one of the OpenSSL cipher algorithms
you have compiled. See @code{ossl-available-ciphers}.

@var{string} is the text to be decrypted.

@var{key} should be a key generated suitably for this cipher, for
example by @code{ossl-bytes-to-key}.

Optional fourth argument @var{iv} should be an initialisation vector
suitable for this cipher. Normally the initialisation vector from
@var{key}'s property list is used. However, if @var{iv} is
non-@code{nil}, use this IV instead.
@end defun

@example
@group
(base16-encode-string
 (let ((key
        (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "salt" "secret" 10)))
   (ossl-encrypt 'AES-256-OFB "Very secret text." key)))
  @result{} "bbedc78c88eddea29c8653f551da391091"
@end group

@group
(let ((key
       (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "salt" "secret" 10))
      (s (base16-decode-string "bbedc78c88eddea29c8653f551da391091")))
  (ossl-decrypt 'AES-256-OFB s key))
  @result{} "Very secret text."
@end group

@group
(let ((key
       (ossl-bytes-to-key 'AES-256-OFB 'SHA512 "salt" "dontknow" 1))
      (s (base16-decode-string "bbedc78c88eddea29c8653f551da391091")))
  (ossl-decrypt 'AES-256-OFB s key))
  @result{} "?????????????????"
@end group
@end example

The above example shows a complete cycle of encryption and decryption,
as well as an attempt to decrypt a string using a wrong password.

  As for message digests, there are two companion functions which
directly work on files.

@defun ossl-encrypt-file cipher file key &optional iv outfile
Return the encrypted contents of @var{file} computed by @var{cipher}
under @var{key}.

@var{cipher} (a symbol) may be one of the OpenSSL cipher algorithms
you have compiled. See @code{ossl-available-ciphers}.

@var{file} is the file to be encrypted.

@var{key} should be a key generated suitably for this
cipher, for example by @code{ossl-bytes-to-key}.

Optional fourth argument @var{iv} should be an initialisation vector
suitable for this cipher. Normally the initialisation vector from
@var{key}'s property list is used. However, if @var{iv} is
non-@code{nil}, use this IV instead.

Optional fifth argument @var{outfile} may specify a file to have the
encrypted data redirected.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun


@defun ossl-decrypt-file cipher file key &optional iv outfile
Return the deciphered version of @var{file} computed by @var{cipher}
under @var{key}.

@var{cipher} (a symbol) may be one of the OpenSSL cipher algorithms
you have compiled. See @code{ossl-available-ciphers}.

@var{file} is the file to be decrypted.

@var{key} should be a key generated suitably for this
cipher, for example by @code{ossl-bytes-to-key}.

Optional fourth argument @var{iv} should be an initialisation vector
suitable for this cipher. Normally the initialisation vector from
@var{key}'s property list is used. However, if @var{iv} is
non-@code{nil}, use this IV instead.

Optional fifth argument @var{outfile} may specify a file to have the
decrypted data redirected.
@end defun



@node openssl PKEY
@subsection public key crypto systems

While keys for symmetric ciphers can be easily stored as strings, keys
for asymmetric algorithms are more complex.  The openssl API therefore
provides a dedicated primitive type, called pkey.  Pkey objects can
contain key pairs -- i.e. pairs of public keys and corresponding
private keys, public keys, and also certificates.  They are general
container object for various subtypes such as RSA, DSA, EC, and DH
keys.

However, you cannot directly create such a pkey object nor access nor
modify parts of it.  Pkey objects are actually meant as transporter
objects to simplify those functions which need them.

@defun ossl-pkey-p object
Return @code{t} if @var{object} is a pkey, @code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pkey-size pkey
Return the size a public key @var{pkey} in bits.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pkey-private-p pkey
Return non-@code{nil} if @var{pkey} contains private data.

Note: This function is not native OpenSSL.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pkey-get-public pkey
Return a copy of @var{pkey} stripped by the private data.

Note: This function is not native OpenSSL.
@end defun

The above functions have a generic character because they are
independent from the choice of algorithm, see below.  For each of
these algorithms we provide a constructor function
@code{ossl-@var{algo}-generate-key} and a subtype predicate, named
@code{ossl-@var{algo}-pkey-p}.  In case of RSA and DSA we also support
a subkey check.

@noindent
Note: At the moment we do not provide the creation of DH-keys.

Now the first important asymmetric algorithm is RSA.  As mentioned in
the general introduction OpenSSL can be built without it.  The
following functions therefore exist iff @code{(featurep 'openssl-rsa)}
evaluates to @code{t}.

@defun ossl-rsa-generate-key bits exp
Return an RSA public key with of length @var{bits} and exponent @var{exp}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-rsa-pkey-p pkey
Return @code{t} iff @var{pkey} is of RSA type.
@end defun

@defun ossl-rsa-subkey-p pkey1 pkey2
Return @code{t} if @var{pkey1} is a subkey of @var{pkey2}, @code{nil}
otherwise, i.e. if @var{pkey1} has the same public key data as
@var{pkey2} and @var{pkey2} has all private data.

Note: This function is not native OpenSSL.
@end defun

@example
@group
(setq rsaexmpl (ossl-rsa-generate-key 2048 3))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL RSA private/public key, size 2048>
(ossl-rsa-pkey-p rsaexmpl)
  @result{} t
(ossl-pkey-private-p rsaexmpl)
  @result{} t
@end group

@group
(setq rsapub (ossl-pkey-get-public rsaexmpl))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL RSA public key, size 2048>
(ossl-pkey-private-p rsapub)
  @result{} nil
(ossl-rsa-subkey-p rsapub rsaexmpl)
  @result{} t
@end group
@end example


Another important asymmetric algorithm is DSA.  The presence of DSA
support in the underlying library can be checked by @code{(featurep
'openssl-dsa)}.  Nonetheless, it is very unlikely to face an OpenSSL
installation without DSA or RSA.

@defun ossl-dsa-generate-key bits &optional seed
Return a DSA public key with of length @var{bits} seeded with
(optional) @var{seed}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-dsa-pkey-p pkey
Return @code{t} if @var{pkey} is of DSA type, @code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@defun ossl-dsa-subkey-p pkey1 pkey2
Return @code{t} if @var{pkey1} is a subkey of @var{pkey2}, @code{nil}
otherwise, i.e. if @var{pkey1} has the same public key data as
@var{pkey2} and @var{pkey2} has all private data.

Note: This function is not native OpenSSL.
@end defun

@example
@group
(setq dsaexmpl (ossl-dsa-generate-key 1024))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL DSA private/public key, size 384>
(ossl-dsa-pkey-p dsaexmpl)
  @result{} t
(ossl-pkey-private-p dsaexmpl)
  @result{} t
@end group

@group
(setq dsapub (ossl-pkey-get-public dsaexmpl))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL DSA public key, size 384>
(ossl-pkey-private-p dsapub)
  @result{} nil
(ossl-dsa-subkey-p dsapub dsaexmpl)
  @result{} t
@end group
@end example


Elliptic curve cryptography is quite new and is possibly missing on
many systems.  Use @code{(featurep 'openssl-ec)} to check for elliptic
curve support.  Another particularity of the ec system is that it is
based on a fixed set of curves which can be referred to by name.  At
the moment we do not support creating custom curves.

@defun ossl-ec-available-curves
Return a list of builtin elliptic curves.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ec-generate-key curve
Return a EC public key on @var{curve}.
@var{curve} may be any symbol from @code{(ossl-ec-available-curves)}.

Note: At the moment we do not support creating custom curves.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ec-pkey-p pkey
Return @code{t} if @var{pkey} is of EC type, @code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@example
@group
(ossl-ec-available-curves)
  @result{} (Oakley-EC2N-4 Oakley-EC2N-3 wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls12
      wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls11 wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls10
      wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls9 wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls8
      wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls7 wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls6
      wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls5 wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls4
      wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls3 wap-wsg-idm-ecid-wtls1 c2tnb431r1
      c2pnb368w1 c2tnb359v1 c2pnb304w1 c2pnb272w1 c2tnb239v3
      c2tnb239v2 c2tnb239v1 c2pnb208w1 c2tnb191v3 c2tnb191v2
      c2tnb191v1 c2pnb176v1 c2pnb163v3 c2pnb163v2 c2pnb163v1 sect571r1
      sect571k1 sect409r1 sect409k1 sect283r1 sect283k1 sect239k1
      sect233r1 sect233k1 sect193r2 sect193r1 sect163r2 sect163r1
      sect163k1 sect131r2 sect131r1 sect113r2 sect113r1 prime256v1
      prime239v3 prime239v2 prime239v1 prime192v3 prime192v2
      prime192v1 secp521r1 secp384r1 secp256k1 secp224r1 secp224k1
      secp192k1 secp160r2 secp160r1 secp160k1 secp128r2 secp128r1
      secp112r2 secp112r1)
@end group

@group
(setq ecexmpl (ossl-ec-generate-key 'secp224r1))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL EC private/public key, size 512>
(ossl-ec-pkey-p ecexmpl)
  => t
(ossl-pkey-private-p ecexmpl)
  @result{} t
@end group

@group
(setq ecpub (ossl-pkey-get-public ecexmpl))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL EC public key, size 512>
(ossl-pkey-private-p ecpub)
  @result{} nil
@end group
@end example


Finally, there is the DH key exchange.  Its presence can be checked
by @code{(featurep 'openssl-dh)}.  At the moment we do not provide
constructor functions.

@defun ossl-dh-pkey-p pkey
Return @code{t} if @var{pkey} is of DH type, @code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun


Once you have a pkey object you can use it for encryption/decryption,
and/or signing/verification.  Talking in OpenSSL hybrid encryption and
decryption is referred to as sealing and opening, respectively.

@defun ossl-seal cipher string pkey
Return an envelope derived from encrypting @var{string} by
@var{cipher} under @var{pkey} with the hybrid technique.

That is, create a random key/iv pair for the symmetric encryption with
@var{cipher} and encrypt that key/iv asymmetrically with the provided
public key.

The envelope returned is a list
@code{(@var{encrypted_string} @var{encrypted_key} @var{encrypted_iv})}
where
@var{encrypted_string} is the (symmetrically) encrypted message
@var{encrypted_key} is the (asymmetrically) encrypted random key
@var{encrypted_iv} is the (asymmetrically) encrypted random iv

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this function
returns binary string data.
@end defun

@defun ossl-open cipher string pkey ekey eiv
Return the deciphered message @var{string} from an envelope obtained
by @code{ossl-seal}.

@itemize
@item
@var{cipher} is the cipher to use (the same as in @code{ossl-seal})
@item
@var{string} is the encrypted message
@item
@var{pkey} is the private key
@item
@var{ekey} is the encrypted random key
@item
@var{eiv} is the encrypted iv
@end itemize
@end defun

@c  * - HYBRID
@c  *  ossl-seal - gateway to public key hybrid (envelope) encryption
@c  *  ossl-open - gateway to public key hybrid (envelope) decryption
@noindent
In the following example we reuse the keys generated above.

@example
@group
(let ((envl
       (ossl-seal 'AES-256-CBC "I do not want to tell" rsaexmpl)))
  (setq str (car envl)
        key (nth 1 envl)
        iv (nth 2 envl))
  (mapcar #'base16-encode-string envl))
  @result{} ("0e6a38b28efea3ca4901b268c141d7ac23ed5f8fa598d23d9846fe3ec1
       47278e"
      "167911a73b0a228b24e78bdd37197ec95b21bed3bbd62d1915d8fac791
       7915fd49fdd9774e7906ca53ed3bf4fb20de8339e628d469a496f7351c
       06fddda49b71c90e73e31c406cfb0f0fb7411d1c9d49842603c45415cc
       3a8f660c728e8f05c6479d004f5068a7969294b4cc81e13dd257df37dc
       886b11266a3ccba576396d200ebb1a3e8f7185fdbc6de40b63964562f9
       1cbe39118a07415c030fd4c3e25bbe2a64b2ab635b2ef9a71a5ddeeaf0
       4a73d7cd04ad334d1de04228db5a9fb9aebfa6a9dc9d76af5ec329b360
       d1cd8da45868450a3bc5c41bba95a0ad74439f7d5edffcdf7dff09c296
       35ae13215be1ae55f5d2b5e97d6a4d523470eef050b07193"
      "ab458ccb46cbc092c31614e997cd176b")
@end group

@group
(ossl-open 'AES-256-CBC str rsaexmpl key iv)
  @result{} "I do not want to tell"
@end group
@end example

@noindent
The above example is nice but does not demonstrate the real power of
hybrid encryption.  In the following example we reuse the public
subkey @code{rsapub} of @code{rsaexmpl} from above.  Also you will
notice that the random key/iv pair has changed and thus the resulting
encrypted string is not the same.

@example
@group
(let ((envl
       (ossl-seal 'AES-256-CBC "I do not want to tell" rsapub)))
  (setq str (car envl)
        key (nth 1 envl)
        iv (nth 2 envl))
  (mapcar #'base16-encode-string envl))
  @result{} ("93a5b3f2eb5a2eaee44805150717bb325b4e90be947591cc46b7819d3f
       4ec284"
      "300b9ab5a79524fdcb40fbed6bae7e9c470baa0d230f9b97c9b35de442
       62f82b626ef7668329d34cffc3eeddf535a879e974825e984c7e045c0a
       526b3b58453ae55926af519400f32c4aee7115088068fcb6fc75ce78c5
       b6d61bbaf90f0c4aff1d83efd63c45c62989c29efda187bcbd94edf9f1
       427ec8dce22cd6333e8196120285dc5bb224b9d7e9ecfb23e016475706
       5da6f999560d010adaf0465b108b2a84989ff8bd17778b61875f633a35
       a02c2cc1fdf3a3e50ad4a5fb7ad9a05b1a3a1818a21f3d7c71a33949f6
       437ee64bee60e1ae92ebea43ca524b15344a7fc2712e9758b98f1b2c9d
       c8ad3d074486f0d35fece7bf7b6ce979fa760aa7bd5854b2"
      "6979d574e8bc10dfddefd4cb017186a2")
@end group

@group
(ossl-open 'AES-256-CBC str rsaexmpl key iv)
  @result{} "I do not want to tell"
@end group

@group
;; @r{try with just the public part}
(ossl-open 'AES-256-CBC str rsapub key iv)
@error{} cannot open, key has no private key data
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Also note you cannot use DSA keys for sealing.  They are exclusively
for signatures.


Signing and verifying works similar to sealing and opening.  Instead
of a cipher algorithm you need to specify a message digest algorithm.
However, in this case the signature step requires a pkey with private
data and the verification step can be done with only the public part
of the key.

@defun ossl-sign digest string pkey
Return a signature obtained by signing @var{string} under @var{digest}
with @var{pkey}.

That is, hash the message @var{string} with the message digest
@var{digest} and encrypt the result with the private key @var{pkey}.

Note: Due to some relationship between the public key system and the
message digest you cannot use every digest algorithm with every
private key type.
The most certain results will be achieved using
RSA keys with RSA-* digests, DSA keys with DSA-* digests.

See @code{ossl-available-digests}.

Note: You probably want to put a wrapping encoder function
(like @code{base16-encode-string}) around it, since this returns
binary string data.
@end defun

@defun ossl-verify digest string sig pkey
Return @code{t} iff @var{sig} is a valid signature of @var{string}
under @var{digest} obtained by @var{pkey}.

That is, hash the message @var{string} with the message digest
@var{digest}, then decrypt the signature @var{sig} with the public key
@var{pkey}.  Compare the results and return @code{t} iff both hashes
are equal.

@itemize
@item
@var{digest} is the digest to use (the same as in @code{ossl-sign})
@item
@var{string} is the message
@item
@var{sig} is the signature of message
@item
@var{pkey} is the public key
@end itemize
@end defun

@c  * - SIGN
@c  *  ossl-sign - gateway to public key signature
@c  *  ossl-verify - gateway to public key signature verification
@noindent
Again we reuse the keys defined above.

@example
@group
(progn
  (setq sig (ossl-sign 'SHA1 "I owe you a beer" dsaexmpl))
  (base16-encode-string sig))
  @result{} "302d021500c2e5197d266573216e4daa85e0a7e43424d0f031021451186
      24043517e0cd24f381d0e6c92f96198f297"
@end group

@group
(ossl-verify 'SHA1 "I owe you a beer" sig dsapub)
  @result{} t
@end group

@group
;; @r{we try to fake the signed text}
(ossl-verify 'SHA1 "I owe you 10 beer" sig dsapub)
  @result{} nil
@end group
@end example

Note that you cannot use all combinations of pkey and digest
algorithm.  Suitable digests can be found in the
@code{(ossl-available-digests)} list.  Given a digest @var{dgst} there
must be an entry @code{RSA-@var{dgst}} in order to use an RSA key for
signatures under @var{dgst}.  Respectively there must be an entry
@code{DSA-@var{dgst}} for DSA key pairs and all DSA-suitable digests can
also be used for EC keys.

In order to persistently store generated keys the openssl API provides
a simple interface to the PEM routines.  PEM is @emph{the} format for
key pairs or public keys.

@defun ossl-pem-read-public-key file
Return a key (the public part) stored in a PEM structure from
@var{file}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pem-read-key file &optional password
Return a key stored in a PEM structure from @var{file}.
If the (private part of the) key is protected with a password
provide (optional) @var{password}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pem-write-public-key file pkey
Write @var{pkey} (the public part) in a PEM structure to @var{file}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pem-write-key file pkey &optional cipher password
Write @var{pkey} in a PEM structure to @var{file}. The key itself is
protected by (optional) @var{cipher} with @var{password}.

@var{cipher} can be set to @code{nil} and the key will not be
encrypted.  @var{password} is ignored in this case.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pem-public-key pkey
Return @var{pkey} as PEM encoded string.
@end defun

@defun ossl-pem-key pkey &optional cipher password
Return @var{pkey} as PEM encoded string.   The key itself is
protected by (optional) @var{cipher} with @var{password}.

@var{cipher} can be set to @code{nil} and the key will not be
encrypted.  @var{password} is ignored in this case.
@end defun

@example
@group
(ossl-pem-write-key "/tmp/mykey.pem" dsaexmpl)
@end group

@group
(let ((stored (ossl-pem-read-key "/tmp/mykey.pem")))
  (ossl-verify 'SHA1 "I owe you a beer" sig stored))
  @result{} t
@end group

@group
(ossl-pem-public-key rsapub)
  @result{} "-----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
MIIBIDANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQEFAAOCAQ0AMIIBCAKCAQEAtGE7JaGUsVIfLUJmzlkR
qfB7CJjFlYU7tGmD7C1rBiGz0sjTlPwsMjwwCLP6byRvebVeDxGrxbeyZE3sSB4q
oVbevhbwwBMY5+j/8q+3l7KbqoP9CGG40ZbEC6IOqFn8kOmliPdWUlogI1Gr4b7U
R4F+TM6m3r3AQoxeqq+rR5kHat2mvBpxm0o8FZ2KW6ZCAkAXoA3NNCXtSUF9zA6A
u3acUP4eiFAkS4Q6hIuZli4PzxvUugB5/ekyaa5cRzIEqIhh90mkpqjM9qpR15hk
39qiM/SxXmLlncU534byldSgnoIse3tnia4WRBm2qK3zTr24zaBtTTXfmRJMWQwZ
ewIBAw==
-----END PUBLIC KEY-----
"
@end group

@group
(ossl-pem-public-key rsaexmpl)
  @result{} "-----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
MIIBIDANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQEFAAOCAQ0AMIIBCAKCAQEAtGE7JaGUsVIfLUJmzlkR
qfB7CJjFlYU7tGmD7C1rBiGz0sjTlPwsMjwwCLP6byRvebVeDxGrxbeyZE3sSB4q
oVbevhbwwBMY5+j/8q+3l7KbqoP9CGG40ZbEC6IOqFn8kOmliPdWUlogI1Gr4b7U
R4F+TM6m3r3AQoxeqq+rR5kHat2mvBpxm0o8FZ2KW6ZCAkAXoA3NNCXtSUF9zA6A
u3acUP4eiFAkS4Q6hIuZli4PzxvUugB5/ekyaa5cRzIEqIhh90mkpqjM9qpR15hk
39qiM/SxXmLlncU534byldSgnoIse3tnia4WRBm2qK3zTr24zaBtTTXfmRJMWQwZ
ewIBAw==
-----END PUBLIC KEY-----
"
@end group

@group
(ossl-pem-key rsaexmpl 'AES-256-CBC "foobar")
  @result{} "-----BEGIN ENCRYPTED PRIVATE KEY-----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-----END ENCRYPTED PRIVATE KEY-----
"
@end group
@end example


@node openssl SSL/TLS
@subsection Secure Network Layers

The SSL/TLS support in this API is definitely not a copy of the
underlying libssl functions.  Instead we chose a higher level of access
methods because for example @code{SSL_connect} does not work
standalone, and having an elisp loop to check socket messages is
probably not desirable.

Also we chose to actually do what SSL/TLS stands for, namely to
establish a transparent security layer on top of an existing network
connection.  That is, you can use the usual @code{open-network-stream}+
@code{set-process-filter} + @code{process-send-string} chain and at some
point after the establishment of the connection you can coat that
connection with a secure layer.  Of course, this is done transparently
and your existing process filter or send-string commands will not notice
the change.

@defun ossl-ssl-handshake process &optional method ca cert key serverp
Perform a handshake on the network connection @var{process}.

Return a ssl-conn object, or @code{nil} if the handshake failed.
In the latter case, most likely the remote site cannot handle
the specified method, requires a client certificate, or cannot
handle ssl at all.

Optional argument @var{method} indicates the SSL connection method,
it can be one of @code{tls1} which is the default, @code{ssl23},
@code{ssl2}, or @code{ssl3}.

Optional argument @var{ca} indicates a CA certificate.
See @code{ossl-ssl-inject-ca}.

Optional arguments @var{cert} and @var{key} indicate a peer
certificate and possibly a separate key file respectively.
See @code{ossl-ssl-inject-peer-cert}.

Optional argument @var{serverp} indicates whether to perform the
handshake as a server if non-@code{nil}, and as a client otherwise.
Note: In case of a handshake as server it is mandatory to provide
a valid certificate and a corresponding key.
@end defun

Currently there are no high level `@code{open-ssl-stream}' (and such)
functions.  You have to invoke @code{open-network-stream} first and
after establishing that connection @code{ossl-ssl-handshake} should
be performed.

Also, be sure to store the returned SSL-CONN object for later
reference.

@defun ossl-ssl-finish ssl-conn
Finish an SSL connection @var{ssl-conn}.

Note: This may also finish the network connection.
@end defun

As noted above, not all peers finish the connection after finishing
the SS-Layer but it is highly suggested to do so.  Unpredictible
results may occur when you keep using that connection.

@defun ossl-ssl-inject-cert ssl_conn cert &optional key
Add @var{cert} as the local certificate of @var{ssl-conn}.
Optional argument @var{key} specifies a key file or evp-pkey,
if @var{cert} does not contain it.

Both, @var{cert} and @var{key} may be either a filename pointing
to a PEM-encoded certificate and key respectively, or may be an
evp-pkey object.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-inject-ca ssl-conn ca
Add @var{ca} to the pile of certificate authorities of @var{ssl-conn}.
Also force a (re)verification of the remote peer certificate
against @var{ca}.  Return @code{t} if the injection was successful,
@code{nil} otherwise.

@var{ca} may be either a file name pointing to a PEM-encoded
CA certificate, or may be a directory containing a valid
bunch of CA certificates according to OpenSSL's CA path
layout, or may also be an evp-pkey object.
@end defun

While @code{ossl-ssl-inject-ca} may be used even after handshaking
with the remote peer, for example to introduce a certificate authority
to verify the remote peer's identity with hindsight, the same does not
apply to @code{ossl-ssl-inject-peer-cert} since local peer
verification at the remote site can only take place at handshake time.
Regard that function as convenience function.

@example
@group
;; @r{open a https connection to addons.mozilla.org}
(setq p (open-network-stream "moz" "moz" "addons.mozilla.org" 443))
  @result{} #<network connection "moz" (443 . "addons.mozilla.org") state:run>

(setq m (ossl-ssl-handshake p))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL socket layer: TLSv1 on top of
       #<secure network connection "moz"
         (443 . "addons.mozilla.org") state:run>>

;; @r{Let's examine @samp{p}}
p
  @result{} #<secure network connection "moz"
       (443 . "addons.mozilla.org") state:run>

(ossl-ssl-finish m)
  @result{} #<OpenSSL socket layer: dead>

;; @r{Let's examine @samp{p} again}
p
  @result{} #<network connection "moz"
       (443 . "addons.mozilla.org") state:exit>
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Offering a secure listening socket works quite similar as the
following example shows.

@example
@group
;; @r{build the acceptor function}
(defun my-acceptor (proc)
  (ossl-ssl-handshake proc 'ssl23 nil
   "/path/to/server.cert" "/path/to/server.key" t))
  @result{} my-acceptor

;; @r{establish the listening socket}
(open-network-server-stream "listen" "listen"
 "localhost" 4432 'tcp #'my-acceptor)
  @result{} #<network server accepting connections "listen"
       (4432 . "localhost") state:run>
@end group

@group
@r{We connect using the OpenSSL command line interface.}

freundt@@hlid:~$ openssl s_client -ssl3 -connect localhost:4432 \
  -CAfile /etc/ssl/CA/cacert.pem
CONNECTED(00000003)
depth=1 /C=DE/ST=Berlin/O=hlidskjalf.org/OU=local CA/CN=hlid.hli
dskjalf.org/emailAddress=freundt@@hlidskjalf.org
verify return:1
depth=0 /C=DE/ST=Berlin/O=hlidskjalf.org/OU=ldap client freundt/
CN=hlid.hlidskjalf.org/emailAddress=freundt@@hlidskjalf.org
verify return:1
---
Certificate chain
 0 s:/C=DE/ST=Berlin/O=hlidskjalf.org/OU=ldap client freundt/CN=
hlid.hlidskjalf.org/emailAddress=freundt@@hlidskjalf.org
   i:/C=DE/ST=Berlin/O=hlidskjalf.org/OU=local CA/CN=hlid.hlidsk
jalf.org/emailAddress=freundt@@hlidskjalf.org
---
Server certificate
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----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-----END CERTIFICATE-----
@c subject=/C=DE/ST=Berlin/O=hlidskjalf.org/OU=ldap client freundt/
@c CN=hlid.hlidskjalf.org/emailAddress=freundt@@hlidskjalf.org
@c issuer=/C=DE/ST=Berlin/O=hlidskjalf.org/OU=local CA/CN=hlid.hlid
@c skjalf.org/emailAddress=freundt@@hlidskjalf.org
@c ---
@c No client certificate CA names sent
@c ---
@c SSL handshake has read 1289 bytes and written 489 bytes
@c ---
@c New, TLSv1/SSLv3, Cipher is AES256-SHA
@c Server public key is 2048 bit
@c Compression: zlib compression
@c Expansion: zlib compression
@c SSL-Session:
@c     Protocol  : SSLv3
@c     Cipher    : AES256-SHA
@c     Session-ID: 05818FC08CA2A2A27157B4E33A568FA2CE0453633099DB03
@c 90C25CB0C71DBCF2
@c     Session-ID-ctx:
@c     Master-Key: 8D8FEE3EAF1A85BB664AE779A4A4A0F6944EAA355497E162
@c BAF60A7CD3DEAE6633C24116CC4BAF1013F78D2BFC919199
@c     Key-Arg   : None
@c     PSK identity: None
@c     PSK identity hint: None
@c    Compression: 1 (zlib compression)
@c     Start Time: 1155549729
@c     Timeout   : 7200 (sec)
@c     Verify return code: 0 (ok)
@c ---
@dots{}
DONE
@end group
@end example
@noindent
which is exactly the expected output.

At the moment it is @emph{not} possible to establish a server socket
with an SSL acceptor @emph{and} connect to this with another network
stream from within the same SXEmacs instance.  This is because the SSL
handshake is entirely on top of the process system and the event
stream does not know about a special treatmeant of handshakes.  In the
above scenario both connections would block each other since the
handshake is a multiple turn procedure with a fixed order, but the
event loop does not know about the correct order, hence both networks
streams would exit prematurely because of timeouts.

However, the above examples are actually all you need to acquire
secure sockets.  In order to communicate over the socket the usual
tools can be used.  @xref{Processes}.

@example
@group
;; @r{invoke a local postfix and negotiate a TLSv1 session}
(let ((p (open-network-stream "smtps" "smtps" "localhost" 25)))
  (process-send-string p "STARTTLS\r\n")
  (ossl-ssl-handshake p)
  (process-send-string p "EHLO foo.bar.tld\r\n")
  (process-send-string p "QUIT\r\n"))
  @result{} nil
@end group

@group
@r{we look at the resulting process buffer}
@r{TLS becomes active at the third line (reply code 250)}
---------- Buffer: smtps ----------
220 fluch.fresse.org ESMTP Postfix
220 2.0.0 Ready to start TLS
250-fluch.fresse.org
250-PIPELINING
250-SIZE 10240000
250-VRFY
250-ETRN
250-ENHANCEDSTATUSCODES
250-8BITMIME
250 DSN
221 2.0.0 Bye

Process smtps exited abnormally with code 256
@point{}
---------- Buffer: smtps ----------
@end group
@end example

Once a successful handshake has been done the returned ssl-conn object
can be used to determine and tune useful things.  The following two
functions affect the interlinkage between the secure socket and the
ordinary network socket.

@defun ossl-ssl-proselytise-process ssl-conn
Convert the underlying process of @var{ssl-conn} into a secure
network connection object.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-unproselytise-process ssl-conn
Convert the underlying process of @var{ssl-conn} into an ordinary
network connection object.
@end defun

After handshaking the secure layer is transparently linked to the
network socket automatically hence @code{ossl-ssl-proselytise-process}
need not be called explicitly.  That is also why the buffer output in
the above example remained readable.  In contrast
@code{ossl-ssl-unproselytise-process} unleashes the link between
secure socket and network stream.  Having access to the raw
(encrypted) SSL stream may have advantages when a program is supposed
to just forward the stream to somewhere.

@example
@group
(let ((p (open-network-stream "smtps" "smtps" "localhost" 25)))
  (process-send-string p "STARTTLS\r\n")
  (let ((sock (ossl-ssl-handshake p)))
    (ossl-ssl-unproselytise-process sock)
    (ossl-ssl-write sock "EHLO foo.bar.tld\r\n")
    (ossl-ssl-write sock "QUIT\r\n")))
  @result{} nil
@end group

@group
---------- Buffer: smtps ----------
220 fluch.fresse.org ESMTP Postfix
220 2.0.0 Ready to start TLS
< < < < < < < < < <
< raw binary data >
> > > > > > > > > >

Process smtps exited abnormally with code 256
@point{}
---------- Buffer: smtps ----------
@end group
@end example

The snipped portion is a bunch of binary data.  Nonetheless, as can be
seen in the example sending data via @code{process-send-string} will
not work after unproselytising.  There are special I/O functions for
this case.

@defun ossl-ssl-read ssl-conn string
Return the cleartext of @var{string} which is assumed to be a complete
block of data sent through @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun
@c does not work at the moment

@defun ossl-ssl-write ssl-conn string
Send @var{string} to the tunnel @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun

After all, unlinking the two layers currently only works in one
direction.  The ssl-conn object will always know its parent
network-stream.

@defun ossl-ssl-parent ssl-conn
Return the underlying parent layer of @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun

@noindent
In the linked case the converse can be determined by
@code{process-type-data}, @pxref{Processes}.


In order to obtain information about the ciphers which protect the
tunnel communication we provide a bunch of useful functions.  At the
moment ssl-ciphers are automatically negotiated with the remote site
during the handshake procedure and cannot be explicitly requested or
set by the user.

@defun ossl-ssl-cipher-version ssl-conn
Return the protocol version of the tunnel @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-cipher-name ssl-conn
Return the name of the current cipher used in the tunnel @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-cipher-names ssl-conn
Return the names of all supported ciphers in the tunnel @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-cipher-bits ssl-conn
Return the number of effective bits of the current cipher
in @var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-cipher-description ssl-conn
Return a description of the current cipher used in the tunnel
@var{ssl-conn}.
@end defun


Nowadays secure socket layers not only provide security but also
authenticity.  While ciphers are the atoms for the former,
certificates play the major role for the latter.  However,
authenticity is quite optional within the SSL protocol.  That is why
we often append the phrase ``if present'' in the documentation strings
of the following functions.

@defun ossl-ssl-cert ssl-conn
Return the local peer's certificate of @var{ssl-conn} if present,
@code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-peer-cert ssl-conn
Return the remote peer's certificate of @var{ssl-conn} if present,
@code{nil} otherwise.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-peer-cert-chain ssl-conn
Return the certificate chain of @var{ssl-conn} as a list of
evp-pkey objects.
@end defun

@defun ossl-ssl-verify-certificate ssl-conn
Return a verify code of @var{ssl-conn}.

The result is a cons cell with the numeric verify code in the car and
a verbose string in the cdr.
@end defun

@example
@group
(let* ((str (open-network-stream "th" "th" "www.thawte.com" 443))
       (sslc (ossl-ssl-handshake str 'ssl3)))
  (ossl-ssl-peer-cert-chain sslc)
  @result{} (#<OpenSSL X509 Certificate iss:/C=ZA/
        O=Thawte Consulting (Pty) Ltd./CN=Thawte SGC CA
        sub:/C=US/O=VeriSign, Inc./OU=Class 3 Public Primary
        Certification Authority; RSA public key, size 1024>
      #<OpenSSL X509 Certificate iss:/C=ZA/ST=Western Cape/
        L=Cape Town/O=Thawte Consulting (Pty) Ltd/OU=Security/
        CN=www.thawte.com sub:/C=ZA/O=Thawte Consulting (Pty) Ltd./
        CN=Thawte SGC CA; RSA public key, size 1024>)
@end group
@end example


Certificates which stem from one of these functions are usually
wrapped in an evp-pkey object.  In contrast to the public-key handling
functions above, certificates usually carry a lot more information.
Hence evp-pkey objects with certificate data occupy an additional
slot to store X509- and ASN1-specific data.  Nonetheless, passing
evp-pkey objects without X509/ASN1 data will not do harm.

Again, certificate specific data in an SSL connection are read-only at
the moment.  Only the two injection functions, and the handshake
function provide a limited form of influence.

@defun ossl-x509-subject cert
Return the certificate subject of @var{cert} (an evp-pkey object).

This will return a string in LDAP syntax.
@end defun

@defun ossl-x509-issuer cert
Return the certificate issuer of @var{cert} (an evp-pkey object),
that is the organisation which signed the certificate.

This will return a string in LDAP syntax.
@end defun

@defun ossl-x509-serial cert
Return the certificate serial of @var{cert} (an evp-pkey object).
@end defun

@defun ossl-x509-not-before cert
Return the certificate valid-not-before time of @var{cert}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-x509-not-after cert
Return the certificate valid-not-after time of @var{cert}.
@end defun

@defun ossl-x509-signature-type cert
Return the signature type of @var{cert}.
@end defun

@example
@group
(let ((p (open-network-stream "go" "go" "gna.org" 443))
      (s (ossl-ssl-handshake p 'tls1)))
  (setq c (ossl-ssl-peer-cert s)))
  @result{} #<OpenSSL X509 Certificate iss:/ST=The Internet/
       O=The OpenSSL Project/CN=www.openssl.org/
       emailAddress=openssl-team@@openssl.org
       sub:/ST=The Internet/O=The OpenSSL Project/
       OU=Certificate Authority/CN=OpenSSL CA/
       emailAddress=openssl-team@@openssl.org;
       RSA public key, size 1024>
@end group

@group
(ossl-x509-subject c)
  @result{} "/ST=The Internet/O=The OpenSSL Project/CN=www.openssl.org/
      emailAddress=openssl-team@@openssl.org"
@end group

@group
(ossl-x509-issuer c)
  @result{} "/ST=The Internet/O=The OpenSSL Project/
      OU=Certificate Authority/CN=OpenSSL CA/
      emailAddress=openssl-team@@openssl.org"
@end group

@group
(ossl-x509-serial c)
  @result{} 1
@end group

@group
(ossl-x509-not-before c)
  @result{} "020802062727Z"
@end group

@group
(ossl-x509-not-after c)
  @result{} "030802062727Z"
@end group

@group
(ossl-x509-signature-type c)
  @result{} none
@end group
@end example
